 
 Robert Cohn was once middleweight boxing champion of Princeton. Do not
think that I am very much impressed by that as a boxing title, but it
meant a lot to Cohn. He cared nothing for boxing, in fact he disliked
it, but he learned it painfully and thoroughly to counteract the feeling
of inferiority and shyness he had felt on being treated as a Jew at
Princeton. There was a certain inner comfort in knowing he could knock
down anybody who was snooty to him, although, being very shy and a
thoroughly nice boy, he never fought except in the gym. He was Spider
Kelly’s star pupil. Spider Kelly taught all his young gentlemen to box
like featherweights, no matter whether they weighed one hundred and five
or two hundred and five pounds. But it seemed to fit Cohn. He was really
very fast. He was so good that Spider promptly overmatched him and got
his nose permanently flattened. This increased Cohn’s distaste for
boxing, but it gave him a certain satisfaction of some strange sort, and
it certainly improved his nose. In his last year at Princeton he read
too much and took to wearing spectacles. I never met any one of his
class who remembered him. They did not even remember that he was
middleweight boxing champion.

I mistrust all frank and simple people, especially when their stories
hold together, and I always had a suspicion that perhaps Robert Cohn had
never been middleweight boxing champion, and that perhaps a horse had
stepped on his face, or that maybe his mother had been frightened or
seen something, or that he had, maybe, bumped into something as a young
child, but I finally had somebody verify the story from Spider Kelly.
Spider Kelly not only remembered Cohn. He had often wondered what had
become of him.

Robert Cohn was a member, through his father, of one of the richest
Jewish families in New York, and through his mother of one of the
oldest. At the military school where he prepped for Princeton, and
played a very good end on the football team, no one had made him
race-conscious. No one had ever made him feel he was a Jew, and hence
any different from anybody else, until he went to Princeton. He was a
nice boy, a friendly boy, and very shy, and it made him bitter. He took
it out in boxing, and he came out of Princeton with painful
self-consciousness and the flattened nose, and was married by the first
girl who was nice to him. He was married five years, had three children,
lost most of the fifty thousand dollars his father left him, the balance
of the estate having gone to his mother, hardened into a rather
unattractive mould under domestic unhappiness with a rich wife; and just
when he had made up his mind to leave his wife she left him and went off
with a miniature-painter. As he had been thinking for months about
leaving his wife and had not done it because it would be too cruel to
deprive her of himself, her departure was a very healthful shock.

The divorce was arranged and Robert Cohn went out to the Coast. In
California he fell among literary people and, as he still had a little
of the fifty thousand left, in a short time he was backing a review of
the Arts. The review commenced publication in Carmel, California, and
finished in Provincetown, Massachusetts. By that time Cohn, who had been
regarded purely as an angel, and whose name had appeared on the
editorial page merely as a member of the advisory board, had become the
sole editor. It was his money and he discovered he liked the authority
of editing. He was sorry when the magazine became too expensive and he
had to give it up.

By that time, though, he had other things to worry about. He had been
taken in hand by a lady who hoped to rise with the magazine. She was
very forceful, and Cohn never had a chance of not being taken in hand.
Also he was sure that he loved her. When this lady saw that the magazine
was not going to rise, she became a little disgusted with Cohn and
decided that she might as well get what there was to get while there was
still something available, so she urged that they go to Europe, where
Cohn could write. They came to Europe, where the lady had been educated,
and stayed three years. During these three years, the first spent in
travel, the last two in Paris, Robert Cohn had two friends, Braddocks
and myself. Braddocks was his literary friend. I was his tennis friend.

The lady who had him, her name was Frances, found toward the end of the
second year that her looks were going, and her attitude toward Robert
changed from one of careless possession and exploitation to the absolute
determination that he should marry her. During this time Robert’s mother
had settled an allowance on him, about three hundred dollars a month.
During two years and a half I do not believe that Robert Cohn looked at
another woman. He was fairly happy, except that, like many people living
in Europe, he would rather have been in America, and he had discovered
writing. He wrote a novel, and it was not really such a bad novel as the
critics later called it, although it was a very poor novel. He read many
books, played bridge, played tennis, and boxed at a local gymnasium.

I first became aware of his lady’s attitude toward him one night after
the three of us had dined together. We had dined at l’Avenue’s and
afterward went to the Café de Versailles for coffee. We had several
_fines_ after the coffee, and I said I must be going. Cohn had been
talking about the two of us going off somewhere on a weekend trip. He
wanted to get out of town and get in a good walk. I suggested we fly to
Strasbourg and walk up to Saint Odile, or somewhere or other in Alsace.
“I know a girl in Strasbourg who can show us the town,” I said.

Somebody kicked me under the table. I thought it was accidental and went
on: “She’s been there two years and knows everything there is to know
about the town. She’s a swell girl.”

I was kicked again under the table and, looking, saw Frances, Robert’s
lady, her chin lifting and her face hardening.

“Hell,” I said, “why go to Strasbourg? We could go up to Bruges, or to
the Ardennes.”

Cohn looked relieved. I was not kicked again. I said good-night and went
out. Cohn said he wanted to buy a paper and would walk to the corner
with me. “For God’s sake,” he said, “why did you say that about that
girl in Strasbourg for? Didn’t you see Frances?”

“No, why should I? If I know an American girl that lives in Strasbourg
what the hell is it to Frances?”

“It doesn’t make any difference. Any girl. I couldn’t go, that would be
all.”

“Don’t be silly.”

“You don’t know Frances. Any girl at all. Didn’t you see the way she
looked?”

“Oh, well,” I said, “let’s go to Senlis.”

“Don’t get sore.”

“I’m not sore. Senlis is a good place and we can stay at the Grand Cerf
and take a hike in the woods and come home.”

“Good, that will be fine.”

“Well, I’ll see you to-morrow at the courts,” I said.

“Good-night, Jake,” he said, and started back to the café.

“You forgot to get your paper,” I said.

“That’s so.” He walked with me up to the kiosque at the corner. “You are
not sore, are you, Jake?” He turned with the paper in his hand.

“No, why should I be?”

“See you at tennis,” he said. I watched him walk back to the café
holding his paper. I rather liked him and evidently she led him quite a
life.




                                CHAPTER
                                   2


That winter Robert Cohn went over to America with his novel, and it was
accepted by a fairly good publisher. His going made an awful row I
heard, and I think that was where Frances lost him, because several
women were nice to him in New York, and when he came back he was quite
changed. He was more enthusiastic about America than ever, and he was
not so simple, and he was not so nice. The publishers had praised his
novel pretty highly and it rather went to his head. Then several women
had put themselves out to be nice to him, and his horizons had all
shifted. For four years his horizon had been absolutely limited to his
wife. For three years, or almost three years, he had never seen beyond
Frances. I am sure he had never been in love in his life.

He had married on the rebound from the rotten time he had in college,
and Frances took him on the rebound from his discovery that he had not
been everything to his first wife. He was not in love yet but he
realized that he was an attractive quantity to women, and that the fact
of a woman caring for him and wanting to live with him was not simply a
divine miracle. This changed him so that he was not so pleasant to have
around. Also, playing for higher stakes than he could afford in some
rather steep bridge games with his New York connections, he had held
cards and won several hundred dollars. It made him rather vain of his
bridge game, and he talked several times of how a man could always make
a living at bridge if he were ever forced to.

Then there was another thing. He had been reading W. H. Hudson. That
sounds like an innocent occupation, but Cohn had read and reread “The
Purple Land.” “The Purple Land” is a very sinister book if read too late
in life. It recounts splendid imaginary amorous adventures of a perfect
English gentleman in an intensely romantic land, the scenery of which is
very well described. For a man to take it at thirty-four as a guide-book
to what life holds is about as safe as it would be for a man of the same
age to enter Wall Street direct from a French convent, equipped with a
complete set of the more practical Alger books. Cohn, I believe, took
every word of “The Purple Land” as literally as though it had been an
R. G. Dun report. You understand me, he made some reservations, but on
the whole the book to him was sound. It was all that was needed to set
him off. I did not realize the extent to which it had set him off until
one day he came into my office.

“Hello, Robert,” I said. “Did you come in to cheer me up?”

“Would you like to go to South America, Jake?” he asked.

“No.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t know. I never wanted to go. Too expensive. You can see all the
South Americans you want in Paris anyway.”

“They’re not the real South Americans.”

“They look awfully real to me.”

I had a boat train to catch with a week’s mail stories, and only half of
them written.

“Do you know any dirt?” I asked.

“No.”

“None of your exalted connections getting divorces?”

“No; listen, Jake. If I handled both our expenses, would you go to South
America with me?”

“Why me?”

“You can talk Spanish. And it would be more fun with two of us.”

“No,” I said, “I like this town and I go to Spain in the summer-time.”

“All my life I’ve wanted to go on a trip like that,” Cohn said. He sat
down. “I’ll be too old before I can ever do it.”

“Don’t be a fool,” I said. “You can go anywhere you want. You’ve got
plenty of money.”

“I know. But I can’t get started.”

“Cheer up,” I said. “All countries look just like the moving pictures.”

But I felt sorry for him. He had it badly.

“I can’t stand it to think my life is going so fast and I’m not really
living it.”

“Nobody ever lives their life all the way up except bull-fighters.”

“I’m not interested in bull-fighters. That’s an abnormal life. I want to
go back in the country in South America. We could have a great trip.”

“Did you ever think about going to British East Africa to shoot?”

“No, I wouldn’t like that.”

“I’d go there with you.”

“No; that doesn’t interest me.”

“That’s because you never read a book about it. Go on and read a book
all full of love affairs with the beautiful shiny black princesses.”

“I want to go to South America.”

He had a hard, Jewish, stubborn streak.

“Come on down-stairs and have a drink.”

“Aren’t you working?”

“No,” I said. We went down the stairs to the café on the ground floor. I
had discovered that was the best way to get rid of friends. Once you had
a drink all you had to say was: “Well, I’ve got to get back and get off
some cables,” and it was done. It is very important to discover graceful
exits like that in the newspaper business, where it is such an important
part of the ethics that you should never seem to be working. Anyway, we
went down-stairs to the bar and had a whiskey and soda. Cohn looked at
the bottles in bins around the wall. “This is a good place,” he said.

“There’s a lot of liquor,” I agreed.

“Listen, Jake,” he leaned forward on the bar. “Don’t you ever get the
feeling that all your life is going by and you’re not taking advantage
of it? Do you realize you’ve lived nearly half the time you have to live
already?”

“Yes, every once in a while.”

“Do you know that in about thirty-five years more we’ll be dead?”

“What the hell, Robert,” I said. “What the hell.”

“I’m serious.”

“It’s one thing I don’t worry about,” I said.

“You ought to.”

“I’ve had plenty to worry about one time or other. I’m through
worrying.”

“Well, I want to go to South America.”

“Listen, Robert, going to another country doesn’t make any difference.
I’ve tried all that. You can’t get away from yourself by moving from one
place to another. There’s nothing to that.”

“But you’ve never been to South America.”

“South America hell! If you went there the way you feel now it would be
exactly the same. This is a good town. Why don’t you start living your
life in Paris?”

“I’m sick of Paris, and I’m sick of the Quarter.”

“Stay away from the Quarter. Cruise around by yourself and see what
happens to you.”

“Nothing happens to me. I walked alone all one night and nothing
happened except a bicycle cop stopped me and asked to see my papers.”

“Wasn’t the town nice at night?”

“I don’t care for Paris.”

So there you were. I was sorry for him, but it was not a thing you could
do anything about, because right away you ran up against the two
stubbornnesses: South America could fix it and he did not like Paris. He
got the first idea out of a book, and I suppose the second came out of a
book too.

“Well,” I said, “I’ve got to go up-stairs and get off some cables.”

“Do you really have to go?”

“Yes, I’ve got to get these cables off.”

“Do you mind if I come up and sit around the office?”

“No, come on up.”

He sat in the outer room and read the papers, and the Editor and
Publisher and I worked hard for two hours. Then I sorted out the
carbons, stamped on a by-line, put the stuff in a couple of big manila
envelopes and rang for a boy to take them to the Gare St. Lazare. I went
out into the other room and there was Robert Cohn asleep in the big
chair. He was asleep with his head on his arms. I did not like to wake
him up, but I wanted to lock the office and shove off. I put my hand on
his shoulder. He shook his head. “I can’t do it,” he said, and put his
head deeper into his arms. “I can’t do it. Nothing will make me do it.”

“Robert,” I said, and shook him by the shoulder. He looked up. He smiled
and blinked.

“Did I talk out loud just then?”

“Something. But it wasn’t clear.”

“God, what a rotten dream!”

“Did the typewriter put you to sleep?”

“Guess so. I didn’t sleep all last night.”

“What was the matter?”

“Talking,” he said.

I could picture it. I have a rotten habit of picturing the bedroom
scenes of my friends. We went out to the Café Napolitain to have an
_apéritif_ and watch the evening crowd on the Boulevard.




                                CHAPTER
                                   3


It was a warm spring night and I sat at a table on the terrace of the
Napolitain after Robert had gone, watching it get dark and the electric
signs come on, and the red and green stop-and-go traffic-signal, and the
crowd going by, and the horse-cabs clippety-clopping along at the edge
of the solid taxi traffic, and the _poules_ going by, singly and in
pairs, looking for the evening meal. I watched a good-looking girl walk
past the table and watched her go up the street and lost sight of her,
and watched another, and then saw the first one coming back again. She
went by once more and I caught her eye, and she came over and sat down
at the table. The waiter came up.

“Well, what will you drink?” I asked.

“Pernod.”

“That’s not good for little girls.”

“Little girl yourself. Dites garçon, un pernod.”

“A pernod for me, too.”

“What’s the matter?” she asked. “Going on a party?”

“Sure. Aren’t you?”

“I don’t know. You never know in this town.”

“Don’t you like Paris?”

“No.”

“Why don’t you go somewhere else?”

“Isn’t anywhere else.”

“You’re happy, all right.”

“Happy, hell!”

Pernod is greenish imitation absinthe. When you add water it turns
milky. It tastes like licorice and it has a good uplift, but it drops
you just as far. We sat and drank it, and the girl looked sullen.

“Well,” I said, “are you going to buy me a dinner?”

She grinned and I saw why she made a point of not laughing. With her
mouth closed she was a rather pretty girl. I paid for the saucers and we
walked out to the street. I hailed a horse-cab and the driver pulled up
at the curb. Settled back in the slow, smoothly rolling _fiacre_ we
moved up the Avenue de l’Opéra, passed the locked doors of the shops,
their windows lighted, the Avenue broad and shiny and almost deserted.
The cab passed the New York _Herald_ bureau with the window full of
clocks.

“What are all the clocks for?” she asked.

“They show the hour all over America.”

“Don’t kid me.”

We turned off the Avenue up the Rue des Pyramides, through the traffic
of the Rue de Rivoli, and through a dark gate into the Tuileries. She
cuddled against me and I put my arm around her. She looked up to be
kissed. She touched me with one hand and I put her hand away.

“Never mind.”

“What’s the matter? You sick?”

“Yes.”

“Everybody’s sick. I’m sick, too.”

We came out of the Tuileries into the light and crossed the Seine and
then turned up the Rue des Saints Pères.

“You oughtn’t to drink pernod if you’re sick.”

“You neither.”

“It doesn’t make any difference with me. It doesn’t make any difference
with a woman.”

“What are you called?”

“Georgette. How are you called?”

“Jacob.”

“That’s a Flemish name.”

“American too.”

“You’re not Flamand?”

“No, American.”

“Good, I detest Flamands.”

By this time we were at the restaurant. I called to the _cocher_ to
stop. We got out and Georgette did not like the looks of the place.
“This is no great thing of a restaurant.”

“No,” I said. “Maybe you would rather go to Foyot’s. Why don’t you keep
the cab and go on?”

I had picked her up because of a vague sentimental idea that it would be
nice to eat with some one. It was a long time since I had dined with a
_poule_, and I had forgotten how dull it could be. We went into the
restaurant, passed Madame Lavigne at the desk and into a little room.
Georgette cheered up a little under the food.

“It isn’t bad here,” she said. “It isn’t chic, but the food is all
right.”

“Better than you eat in Liège.”

“Brussels, you mean.”

We had another bottle of wine and Georgette made a joke. She smiled and
showed all her bad teeth, and we touched glasses. “You’re not a bad
type,” she said. “It’s a shame you’re sick. We get on well. What’s the
matter with you, anyway?”

“I got hurt in the war,” I said.

“Oh, that dirty war.”

We would probably have gone on and discussed the war and agreed that it
was in reality a calamity for civilization, and perhaps would have been
better avoided. I was bored enough. Just then from the other room some
one called: “Barnes! I say, Barnes! Jacob Barnes!”

“It’s a friend calling me,” I explained, and went out.

There was Braddocks at a big table with a party: Cohn, Frances Clyne,
Mrs. Braddocks, several people I did not know.

“You’re coming to the dance, aren’t you?” Braddocks asked.

“What dance?”

“Why, the dancings. Don’t you know we’ve revived them?” Mrs. Braddocks
put in.

“You must come, Jake. We’re all going,” Frances said from the end of the
table. She was tall and had a smile.

“Of course, he’s coming,” Braddocks said. “Come in and have coffee with
us, Barnes.”

“Right.”

“And bring your friend,” said Mrs. Braddocks laughing. She was a
Canadian and had all their easy social graces.

“Thanks, we’ll be in,” I said. I went back to the small room.

“Who are your friends?” Georgette asked.

“Writers and artists.”

“There are lots of those on this side of the river.”

“Too many.”

“I think so. Still, some of them make money.”

“Oh, yes.”

We finished the meal and the wine. “Come on,” I said. “We’re going to
have coffee with the others.”

Georgette opened her bag, made a few passes at her face as she looked in
the little mirror, re-defined her lips with the lipstick, and
straightened her hat.

“Good,” she said.

We went into the room full of people and Braddocks and the men at his
table stood up.

“I wish to present my fiancée, Mademoiselle Georgette Leblanc,” I said.
Georgette smiled that wonderful smile, and we shook hands all round.

“Are you related to Georgette Leblanc, the singer?” Mrs. Braddocks
asked.

“Connais pas,” Georgette answered.

“But you have the same name,” Mrs. Braddocks insisted cordially.

“No,” said Georgette. “Not at all. My name is Hobin.”

“But Mr. Barnes introduced you as Mademoiselle Georgette Leblanc. Surely
he did,” insisted Mrs. Braddocks, who in the excitement of talking
French was liable to have no idea what she was saying.

“He’s a fool,” Georgette said.

“Oh, it was a joke, then,” Mrs. Braddocks said.

“Yes,” said Georgette. “To laugh at.”

“Did you hear that, Henry?” Mrs. Braddocks called down the table to
Braddocks. “Mr. Barnes introduced his fiancée as Mademoiselle Leblanc,
and her name is actually Hobin.”

“Of course, darling. Mademoiselle Hobin, I’ve known her for a very long
time.”

“Oh, Mademoiselle Hobin,” Frances Clyne called, speaking French very
rapidly and not seeming so proud and astonished as Mrs. Braddocks at its
coming out really French. “Have you been in Paris long? Do you like it
here? You love Paris, do you not?”

“Who’s she?” Georgette turned to me. “Do I have to talk to her?”

She turned to Frances, sitting smiling, her hands folded, her head
poised on her long neck, her lips pursed ready to start talking again.

“No, I don’t like Paris. It’s expensive and dirty.”

“Really? I find it so extraordinarily clean. One of the cleanest cities
in all Europe.”

“I find it dirty.”

“How strange! But perhaps you have not been here very long.”

“I’ve been here long enough.”

“But it does have nice people in it. One must grant that.”

Georgette turned to me. “You have nice friends.”

Frances was a little drunk and would have liked to have kept it up but
the coffee came, and Lavigne with the liqueurs, and after that we all
went out and started for Braddocks’s dancing-club.

The dancing-club was a _bal musette_ in the Rue de la Montagne Sainte
Geneviève. Five nights a week the working people of the Pantheon quarter
danced there. One night a week it was the dancing-club. On Monday nights
it was closed. When we arrived it was quite empty, except for a
policeman sitting near the door, the wife of the proprietor back of the
zinc bar, and the proprietor himself. The daughter of the house came
downstairs as we went in. There were long benches, and tables ran across
the room, and at the far end a dancing-floor.

“I wish people would come earlier,” Braddocks said. The daughter came up
and wanted to know what we would drink. The proprietor got up on a high
stool beside the dancing-floor and began to play the accordion. He had a
string of bells around one of his ankles and beat time with his foot as
he played. Every one danced. It was hot and we came off the floor
perspiring.

“My God,” Georgette said. “What a box to sweat in!”

“It’s hot.”

“Hot, my God!”

“Take off your hat.”

“That’s a good idea.”

Some one asked Georgette to dance, and I went over to the bar. It was
really very hot and the accordion music was pleasant in the hot night. I
drank a beer, standing in the doorway and getting the cool breath of
wind from the street. Two taxis were coming down the steep street. They
both stopped in front of the Bal. A crowd of young men, some in jerseys
and some in their shirt-sleeves, got out. I could see their hands and
newly washed, wavy hair in the light from the door. The policeman
standing by the door looked at me and smiled. They came in. As they went
in, under the light I saw white hands, wavy hair, white faces,
grimacing, gesturing, talking. With them was Brett. She looked very
lovely and she was very much with them.

One of them saw Georgette and said: “I do declare. There is an actual
harlot. I’m going to dance with her, Lett. You watch me.”

The tall dark one, called Lett, said: “Don’t you be rash.”

The wavy blond one answered: “Don’t you worry, dear.” And with them was
Brett.

I was very angry. Somehow they always made me angry. I know they are
supposed to be amusing, and you should be tolerant, but I wanted to
swing on one, any one, anything to shatter that superior, simpering
composure. Instead, I walked down the street and had a beer at the bar
at the next Bal. The beer was not good and I had a worse cognac to take
the taste out of my mouth. When I came back to the Bal there was a crowd
on the floor and Georgette was dancing with the tall blond youth, who
danced big-hippily, carrying his head on one side, his eyes lifted as he
danced. As soon as the music stopped another one of them asked her to
dance. She had been taken up by them. I knew then that they would all
dance with her. They are like that.

I sat down at a table. Cohn was sitting there. Frances was dancing. Mrs.
Braddocks brought up somebody and introduced him as Robert Prentiss. He
was from New York by way of Chicago, and was a rising new novelist. He
had some sort of an English accent. I asked him to have a drink.

“Thanks so much,” he said, “I’ve just had one.”

“Have another.”

“Thanks, I will then.”

We got the daughter of the house over and each had a _fine à l’eau_.

“You’re from Kansas City, they tell me,” he said.

“Yes.”

“Do you find Paris amusing?”

“Yes.”

“Really?”

I was a little drunk. Not drunk in any positive sense but just enough to
be careless.

“For God’s sake,” I said, “yes. Don’t you?”

“Oh, how charmingly you get angry,” he said. “I wish I had that
faculty.”

I got up and walked over toward the dancing-floor. Mrs. Braddocks
followed me. “Don’t be cross with Robert,” she said. “He’s still only a
child, you know.”

“I wasn’t cross,” I said. “I just thought perhaps I was going to throw
up.”

“Your fiancée is having a great success,” Mrs. Braddocks looked out on
the floor where Georgette was dancing in the arms of the tall, dark one,
called Lett.

“Isn’t she?” I said.

“Rather,” said Mrs. Braddocks.

Cohn came up. “Come on, Jake,” he said, “have a drink.” We walked over
to the bar. “What’s the matter with you? You seem all worked up over
something?”

“Nothing. This whole show makes me sick is all.”

Brett came up to the bar.

“Hello, you chaps.”

“Hello, Brett,” I said. “Why aren’t you tight?”

“Never going to get tight any more. I say, give a chap a brandy and
soda.”

She stood holding the glass and I saw Robert Cohn looking at her. He
looked a great deal as his compatriot must have looked when he saw the
promised land. Cohn, of course, was much younger. But he had that look
of eager, deserving expectation.

Brett was damned good-looking. She wore a slipover jersey sweater and a
tweed skirt, and her hair was brushed back like a boy’s. She started all
that. She was built with curves like the hull of a racing yacht, and you
missed none of it with that wool jersey.

“It’s a fine crowd you’re with, Brett,” I said.

“Aren’t they lovely? And you, my dear. Where did you get it?”

“At the Napolitain.”

“And have you had a lovely evening?”

“Oh, priceless,” I said.

Brett laughed. “It’s wrong of you, Jake. It’s an insult to all of us.
Look at Frances there, and Jo.”

This for Cohn’s benefit.

“It’s in restraint of trade,” Brett said. She laughed again.

“You’re wonderfully sober,” I said.

“Yes. Aren’t I? And when one’s with the crowd I’m with, one can drink in
such safety, too.”

The music started and Robert Cohn said: “Will you dance this with me,
Lady Brett?”

Brett smiled at him. “I’ve promised to dance this with Jacob,” she
laughed. “You’ve a hell of a biblical name, Jake.”

“How about the next?” asked Cohn.

“We’re going,” Brett said. “We’ve a date up at Montmartre.” Dancing, I
looked over Brett’s shoulder and saw Cohn, standing at the bar, still
watching her.

“You’ve made a new one there,” I said to her.

“Don’t talk about it. Poor chap. I never knew it till just now.”

“Oh, well,” I said. “I suppose you like to add them up.”

“Don’t talk like a fool.”

“You do.”

“Oh, well. What if I do?”

“Nothing,” I said. We were dancing to the accordion and some one was
playing the banjo. It was hot and I felt happy. We passed close to
Georgette dancing with another one of them.

“What possessed you to bring her?”

“I don’t know, I just brought her.”

“You’re getting damned romantic.”

“No, bored.”

“Now?”

“No, not now.”

“Let’s get out of here. She’s well taken care of.”

“Do you want to?”

“Would I ask you if I didn’t want to?”

We left the floor and I took my coat off a hanger on the wall and put it
on. Brett stood by the bar. Cohn was talking to her. I stopped at the
bar and asked them for an envelope. The patronne found one. I took a
fifty-franc note from my pocket, put it in the envelope, sealed it, and
handed it to the patronne.

“If the girl I came with asks for me, will you give her this?” I said.
“If she goes out with one of those gentlemen, will you save this for
me?”

“C’est entendu, Monsieur,” the patronne said. “You go now? So early?”

“Yes,” I said.

We started out the door. Cohn was still talking to Brett. She said good
night and took my arm. “Good night, Cohn,” I said. Outside in the street
we looked for a taxi.

“You’re going to lose your fifty francs,” Brett said.

“Oh, yes.”

“No taxis.”

“We could walk up to the Pantheon and get one.”

“Come on and we’ll get a drink in the pub next door and send for one.”

“You wouldn’t walk across the street.”

“Not if I could help it.”

We went into the next bar and I sent a waiter for a taxi.

“Well,” I said, “we’re out away from them.”

We stood against the tall zinc bar and did not talk and looked at each
other. The waiter came and said the taxi was outside. Brett pressed my
hand hard. I gave the waiter a franc and we went out. “Where should I
tell him?” I asked.

“Oh, tell him to drive around.”

I told the driver to go to the Parc Montsouris, and got in, and slammed
the door. Brett was leaning back in the corner, her eyes closed. I got
in and sat beside her. The cab started with a jerk.

“Oh, darling, I’ve been so miserable,” Brett said.




                                CHAPTER
                                   4


The taxi went up the hill, passed the lighted square, then on into the
dark, still climbing, then levelled out onto a dark street behind St.
Etienne du Mont, went smoothly down the asphalt, passed the trees and
the standing bus at the Place de la Contrescarpe, then turned onto the
cobbles of the Rue Mouffetard. There were lighted bars and late open
shops on each side of the street. We were sitting apart and we jolted
close together going down the old street. Brett’s hat was off. Her head
was back. I saw her face in the lights from the open shops, then it was
dark, then I saw her face clearly as we came out on the Avenue des
Gobelins. The street was torn up and men were working on the car-tracks
by the light of acetylene flares. Brett’s face was white and the long
line of her neck showed in the bright light of the flares. The street
was dark again and I kissed her. Our lips were tight together and then
she turned away and pressed against the corner of the seat, as far away
as she could get. Her head was down.

“Don’t touch me,” she said. “Please don’t touch me.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I can’t stand it.”

“Oh, Brett.”

“You mustn’t. You must know. I can’t stand it, that’s all. Oh, darling,
please understand!”

“Don’t you love me?”

“Love you? I simply turn all to jelly when you touch me.”

“Isn’t there anything we can do about it?”

She was sitting up now. My arm was around her and she was leaning back
against me, and we were quite calm. She was looking into my eyes with
that way she had of looking that made you wonder whether she really saw
out of her own eyes. They would look on and on after every one else’s
eyes in the world would have stopped looking. She looked as though there
were nothing on earth she would not look at like that, and really she
was afraid of so many things.

“And there’s not a damn thing we could do,” I said.

“I don’t know,” she said. “I don’t want to go through that hell again.”

“We’d better keep away from each other.”

“But, darling, I have to see you. It isn’t all that you know.”

“No, but it always gets to be.”

“That’s my fault. Don’t we pay for all the things we do, though?”

She had been looking into my eyes all the time. Her eyes had different
depths, sometimes they seemed perfectly flat. Now you could see all the
way into them.

“When I think of the hell I’ve put chaps through. I’m paying for it all
now.”

“Don’t talk like a fool,” I said. “Besides, what happened to me is
supposed to be funny. I never think about it.”

“Oh, no. I’ll lay you don’t.”

“Well, let’s shut up about it.”

“I laughed about it too, myself, once.” She wasn’t looking at me. “A
friend of my brother’s came home that way from Mons. It seemed like a
hell of a joke. Chaps never know anything, do they?”

“No,” I said. “Nobody ever knows anything.”

I was pretty well through with the subject. At one time or another I had
probably considered it from most of its various angles, including the
one that certain injuries or imperfections are a subject of merriment
while remaining quite serious for the person possessing them.

“It’s funny,” I said. “It’s very funny. And it’s a lot of fun, too, to
be in love.”

“Do you think so?” her eyes looked flat again.

“I don’t mean fun that way. In a way it’s an enjoyable feeling.”

“No,” she said. “I think it’s hell on earth.”

“It’s good to see each other.”

“No. I don’t think it is.”

“Don’t you want to?”

“I have to.”

We were sitting now like two strangers. On the right was the Parc
Montsouris. The restaurant where they have the pool of live trout and
where you can sit and look out over the park was closed and dark. The
driver leaned his head around.

“Where do you want to go?” I asked. Brett turned her head away.

“Oh, go to the Select.”

“Café Select,” I told the driver. “Boulevard Montparnasse.” We drove
straight down, turning around the Lion de Belfort that guards the
passing Montrouge trams. Brett looked straight ahead. On the Boulevard
Raspail, with the lights of Montparnasse in sight, Brett said: “Would
you mind very much if I asked you to do something?”

“Don’t be silly.”

“Kiss me just once more before we get there.”

When the taxi stopped I got out and paid. Brett came out putting on her
hat. She gave me her hand as she stepped down. Her hand was shaky. “I
say, do I look too much of a mess?” She pulled her man’s felt hat down
and started in for the bar. Inside, against the bar and at tables, were
most of the crowd who a been at the dance.

“Hello, you chaps,” Brett said. “I’m going to have a drink.”

“Oh, Brett! Brett!” the little Greek portrait-painter, who called
himself a duke, and whom everybody called Zizi, pushed up to her. “I got
something fine to tell you.”

“Hello, Zizi,” Brett said.

“I want you to meet a friend,” Zizi said. A fat man came up.

“Count Mippipopolous, meet my friend Lady Ashley.”

“How do you do?” said Brett.

“Well, does your Ladyship have a good time here in Paris?” asked Count
Mippipopolous, who wore an elk’s tooth on his watch-chain.

“Rather,” said Brett.

“Paris is a fine town all right,” said the count. “But I guess you have
pretty big doings yourself over in London.”

“Oh, yes,” said Brett. “Enormous.”

Braddocks called to me from a table. “Barnes,” he said, “have a drink.
That girl of yours got in a frightful row.”

“What about?”

“Something the patronne’s daughter said. A corking row. She was rather
splendid, you know. Showed her yellow card and demanded the patronne’s
daughter’s too. I say it was a row.”

“What finally happened?”

“Oh, some one took her home. Not a bad-looking girl. Wonderful command
of the idiom. Do stay and have a drink.”

“No,” I said. “I must shove off. Seen Cohn?”

“He went home with Frances,” Mrs. Braddock put in.

“Poor chap, he looks awfully down,” Braddocks said.

“I dare say he is,” said Mrs. Braddocks.

“I have to shove off,” I said. “Good night.”

I said good night to Brett at the bar. The count was buying champagne.
“Will you take a glass of wine with us, sir?” he asked.

“No. Thanks awfully. I have to go.”

“Really going?” Brett asked.

“Yes,” I said. “I’ve got a rotten headache.”

“I’ll see you to-morrow?”

“Come in at the office.”

“Hardly.”

“Well, where will I see you?”

“Anywhere around five o’clock.”

“Make it the other side of town then.”

“Good. I’ll be at the Crillon at five.”

“Try and be there,” I said.

“Don’t worry,” Brett said. “I’ve never let you down, have I?”

“Heard from Mike?”

“Letter to-day.”

“Good night, sir,” said the count.

I went out onto the sidewalk and walked down toward the Boulevard St.
Michel, passed the tables of the Rotonde, still crowded, looked across
the street at the Dome, its tables running out to the edge of the
pavement. Some one waved at me from a table, I did not see who it was
and went on. I wanted to get home. The Boulevard Montparnasse was
deserted. Lavigne’s was closed tight, and they were stacking the tables
outside the Closerie des Lilas. I passed Ney’s statue standing among the
new-leaved chestnut-trees in the arc-light. There was a faded purple
wreath leaning against the base. I stopped and read the inscription:
from the Bonapartist Groups, some date; I forget. He looked very fine,
Marshal Ney in his top-boots, gesturing with his sword among the green
new horse-chestnut leaves. My flat was just across the street, a little
way down the Boulevard St. Michel.

There was a light in the concierge’s room and I knocked on the door and
she gave me my mail. I wished her good night and went up-stairs. There
were two letters and some papers. I looked at them under the gas-light
in the dining-room. The letters were from the States. One was a bank
statement. It showed a balance of $2432.60. I got out my check-book and
deducted four checks drawn since the first of the month, and discovered
I had a balance of $1832.60. I wrote this on the back of the statement.
The other letter was a wedding announcement. Mr. and Mrs. Aloysius Kirby
announce the marriage of their daughter Katherine—I knew neither the
girl nor the man she was marrying. They must be circularizing the town.
It was a funny name. I felt sure I could remember anybody with a name
like Aloysius. It was a good Catholic name. There was a crest on the
announcement. Like Zizi the Greek duke. And that count. The count was
funny. Brett had a title, too. Lady Ashley. To hell with Brett. To hell
with you, Lady Ashley.

I lit the lamp beside the bed, turned off the gas, and opened the wide
windows. The bed was far back from the windows, and I sat with the
windows open and undressed by the bed. Outside a night train, running on
the street-car tracks, went by carrying vegetables to the markets. They
were noisy at night when you could not sleep. Undressing, I looked at
myself in the mirror of the big armoire beside the bed. That was a
typically French way to furnish a room. Practical, too, I suppose. Of
all the ways to be wounded. I suppose it was funny. I put on my pajamas
and got into bed. I had the two bull-fight papers, and I took their
wrappers off. One was orange. The other yellow. They would both have the
same news, so whichever I read first would spoil the other. _Le Toril_
was the better paper, so I started to read it. I read it all the way
through, including the Petite Correspondance and the Cornigrams. I blew
out the lamp. Perhaps I would be able to sleep.

My head started to work. The old grievance. Well, it was a rotten way to
be wounded and flying on a joke front like the Italian. In the Italian
hospital we were going to form a society. It had a funny name in
Italian. I wonder what became of the others, the Italians. That was in
the Ospedale Maggiore in Milano, Padiglione Ponte. The next building was
the Padiglione Zonda. There was a statue of Ponte, or maybe it was
Zonda. That was where the liaison colonel came to visit me. That was
funny. That was about the first funny thing. I was all bandaged up. But
they had told him about it. Then he made that wonderful speech: “You, a
foreigner, an Englishman” (any foreigner was an Englishman) “have given
more than your life.” What a speech! I would like to have it illuminated
to hang in the office. He never laughed. He was putting himself in my
place, I guess. “Che mala fortuna! Che mala fortuna!”

I never used to realize it, I guess. I try and play it along and just
not make trouble for people. Probably I never would have had any trouble
if I hadn’t run into Brett when they shipped me to England. I suppose
she only wanted what she couldn’t have. Well, people were that way. To
hell with people. The Catholic Church had an awfully good way of
handling all that. Good advice, anyway. Not to think about it. Oh, it
was swell advice. Try and take it sometime. Try and take it.

I lay awake thinking and my mind jumping around. Then I couldn’t keep
away from it, and I started to think about Brett and all the rest of it
went away. I was thinking about Brett and my mind stopped jumping around
and started to go in sort of smooth waves. Then all of a sudden I
started to cry. Then after a while it was better and I lay in bed and
listened to the heavy trams go by and way down the street, and then I
went to sleep.

I woke up. There was a row going on outside. I listened and I thought I
recognized a voice. I put on a dressing-gown and went to the door. The
concierge was talking down-stairs. She was very angry. I heard my name
and called down the stairs.

“Is that you, Monsieur Barnes?” the concierge called.

“Yes. It’s me.”

“There’s a species of woman here who’s waked the whole street up. What
kind of a dirty business at this time of night! She says she must see
you. I’ve told her you’re asleep.”

Then I heard Brett’s voice. Half asleep I had been sure it was
Georgette. I don’t know why. She could not have known my address.

“Will you send her up, please?”

Brett came up the stairs. I saw she was quite drunk. “Silly thing to
do,” she said. “Make an awful row. I say, you weren’t asleep, were you?”

“What did you think I was doing?”

“Don’t know. What time is it?”

I looked at the clock. It was half-past four. “Had no idea what hour it
was,” Brett said. “I say, can a chap sit down? Don’t be cross, darling.
Just left the count. He brought me here.”

“What’s he like?” I was getting brandy and soda and glasses.

“Just a little,” said Brett. “Don’t try and make me drunk. The count?
Oh, rather. He’s quite one of us.”

“Is he a count?”

“Here’s how. I rather think so, you know. Deserves to be, anyhow. Knows
hell’s own amount about people. Don’t know where he got it all. Owns a
chain of sweetshops in the States.”

She sipped at her glass.

“Think he called it a chain. Something like that. Linked them all up.
Told me a little about it. Damned interesting. He’s one of us, though.
Oh, quite. No doubt. One can always tell.”

She took another drink.

“How do I buck on about all this? You don’t mind, do you? He’s putting
up for Zizi, you know.”

“Is Zizi really a duke, too?”

“I shouldn’t wonder. Greek, you know. Rotten painter. I rather liked the
count.”

“Where did you go with him?”

“Oh, everywhere. He just brought me here now. Offered me ten thousand
dollars to go to Biarritz with him. How much is that in pounds?”

“Around two thousand.”

“Lot of money. I told him I couldn’t do it. He was awfully nice about
it. Told him I knew too many people in Biarritz.”

Brett laughed.

“I say, you are slow on the up-take,” she said. I had only sipped my
brandy and soda. I took a long drink.

“That’s better. Very funny,” Brett said. “Then he wanted me to go to
Cannes with him. Told him I knew too many people in Cannes. Monte Carlo.
Told him I knew too many people in Monte Carlo. Told him I knew too many
people everywhere. Quite true, too. So I asked him to bring me here.”

She looked at me, her hand on the table, her glass raised. “Don’t look
like that,” she said. “Told him I was in love with you. True, too. Don’t
look like that. He was damn nice about it. Wants to drive us out to
dinner to-morrow night. Like to go?”

“Why not?”

“I’d better go now.”

“Why?”

“Just wanted to see you. Damned silly idea. Want to get dressed and come
down? He’s got the car just up the street.”

“The count?”

“Himself. And a chauffeur in livery. Going to drive me around and have
breakfast in the Bois. Hampers. Got it all at Zelli’s. Dozen bottles of
Mumms. Tempt you?”

“I have to work in the morning,” I said. “I’m too far behind you now to
catch up and be any fun.”

“Don’t be an ass.”

“Can’t do it.”

“Right. Send him a tender message?”

“Anything. Absolutely.”

“Good night, darling.”

“Don’t be sentimental.”

“You make me ill.”

We kissed good night and Brett shivered. “I’d better go,” she said.
“Good night, darling.”

“You don’t have to go.”

“Yes.”

We kissed again on the stairs and as I called for the cordon the
concierge muttered something behind her door. I went back up-stairs and
from the open window watched Brett walking up the street to the big
limousine drawn up to the curb under the arc-light. She got in and it
started off. I turned around. On the table was an empty glass and a
glass half-full of brandy and soda. I took them both out to the kitchen
and poured the half-full glass down the sink. I turned off the gas in
the dining-room, kicked off my slippers sitting on the bed, and got into
bed. This was Brett, that I had felt like crying about. Then I thought
of her walking up the street and stepping into the car, as I had last
seen her, and of course in a little while I felt like hell again. It is
awfully easy to be hard-boiled about everything in the daytime, but at
night it is another thing.




                                CHAPTER
                                   5


In the morning I walked down the Boulevard to the rue Soufflot for
coffee and brioche. It was a fine morning. The horse-chestnut trees in
the Luxembourg gardens were in bloom. There was the pleasant
early-morning feeling of a hot day. I read the papers with the coffee
and then smoked a cigarette. The flower-women were coming up from the
market and arranging their daily stock. Students went by going up to the
law school, or down to the Sorbonne. The Boulevard was busy with trams
and people going to work. I got on an S bus and rode down to the
Madeleine, standing on the back platform. From the Madeleine I walked
along the Boulevard des Capucines to the Opéra, and up to my office. I
passed the man with the jumping frogs and the man with the boxer toys. I
stepped aside to avoid walking into the thread with which his girl
assistant manipulated the boxers. She was standing looking away, the
thread in her folded hands. The man was urging two tourists to buy.
Three more tourists had stopped and were watching. I walked on behind a
man who was pushing a roller that printed the name CINZANO on the
sidewalk in damp letters. All along people were going to work. It felt
pleasant to be going to work. I walked across the avenue and turned in
to my office.

Up-stairs in the office I read the French morning papers, smoked, and
then sat at the typewriter and got off a good morning’s work. At eleven
o’clock I went over to the Quai d’Orsay in a taxi and went in and sat
with about a dozen correspondents, while the foreign-office mouthpiece,
a young Nouvelle Revue Française diplomat in horn-rimmed spectacles,
talked and answered questions for half an hour. The President of the
Council was in Lyons making a speech, or, rather he was on his way back.
Several people asked questions to hear themselves talk and there were a
couple of questions asked by news service men who wanted to know the
answers. There was no news. I shared a taxi back from the Quai d’Orsay
with Woolsey and Krum.

“What do you do nights, Jake?” asked Krum. “I never see you around.”

“Oh, I’m over in the Quarter.”

“I’m coming over some night. The Dingo. That’s the great place, isn’t
it?”

“Yes. That, or this new dive, The Select.”

“I’ve meant to get over,” said Krum. “You know how it is, though, with a
wife and kids.”

“Playing any tennis?” Woolsey asked.

“Well, no,” said Krum. “I can’t say I’ve played any this year. I’ve
tried to get away, but Sundays it’s always rained, and the courts are so
damned crowded.”

“The Englishmen all have Saturday off,” Woolsey said.

“Lucky beggars,” said Krum. “Well, I’ll tell you. Some day I’m not going
to be working for an agency. Then I’ll have plenty of time to get out in
the country.”

“That’s the thing to do. Live out in the country and have a little car.”

“I’ve been thinking some about getting a car next year.”

I banged on the glass. The chauffeur stopped. “Here’s my street,” I
said. “Come in and have a drink.”

“Thanks, old man,” Krum said. Woolsey shook his head. “I’ve got to file
that line he got off this morning.”

I put a two-franc piece in Krum’s hand.

“You’re crazy, Jake,” he said. “This is on me.”

“It’s all on the office, anyway.”

“Nope. I want to get it.”

I waved good-by. Krum put his head out. “See you at the lunch on
Wednesday.”

“You bet.”

I went to the office in the elevator. Robert Cohn was waiting for me.
“Hello, Jake,” he said. “Going out to lunch?”

“Yes. Let me see if there is anything new.”

“Where will we eat?”

“Anywhere.”

I was looking over my desk. “Where do you want to eat?”

“How about Wetzel’s? They’ve got good hors d’œuvres.”

In the restaurant we ordered hors d’œuvres and beer. The sommelier
brought the beer, tall, beaded on the outside of the steins, and cold.
There were a dozen different dishes of hors d’œuvres.

“Have any fun last night?” I asked.

“No. I don’t think so.”

“How’s the writing going?”

“Rotten. I can’t get this second book going.”

“That happens to everybody.”

“Oh, I’m sure of that. It gets me worried, though.”

“Thought any more about going to South America?”

“I mean that.”

“Well, why don’t you start off?”

“Frances.”

“Well,” I said, “take her with you.”

“She wouldn’t like it. That isn’t the sort of thing she likes. She likes
a lot of people around.”

“Tell her to go to hell.”

“I can’t. I’ve got certain obligations to her.”

He shoved the sliced cucumbers away and took a pickled herring.

“What do you know about Lady Brett Ashley, Jake?”

“Her name’s Lady Ashley. Brett’s her own name. She’s a nice girl,” I
said. “She’s getting a divorce and she’s going to marry Mike Campbell.
He’s over in Scotland now. Why?”

“She’s a remarkably attractive woman.”

“Isn’t she?”

“There’s a certain quality about her, a certain fineness. She seems to
be absolutely fine and straight.”

“She’s very nice.”

“I don’t know how to describe the quality,” Cohn said. “I suppose it’s
breeding.”

“You sound as though you liked her pretty well.”

“I do. I shouldn’t wonder if I were in love with her.”

“She’s a drunk,” I said. “She’s in love with Mike Campbell, and she’s
going to marry him. He’s going to be rich as hell some day.”

“I don’t believe she’ll ever marry him.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t know. I just don’t believe it. Have you known her a long time?”

“Yes,” I said. “She was a V. A. D. in a hospital I was in during the
war.”

“She must have been just a kid then.”

“She’s thirty-four now.”

“When did she marry Ashley?”

“During the war. Her own true love had just kicked off with the
dysentery.”

“You talk sort of bitter.”

“Sorry. I didn’t mean to. I was just trying to give you the facts.”

“I don’t believe she would marry anybody she didn’t love.”

“Well,” I said. “She’s done it twice.”

“I don’t believe it.”

“Well,” I said, “don’t ask me a lot of fool questions if you don’t like
the answers.”

“I didn’t ask you that.”

“You asked me what I knew about Brett Ashley.”

“I didn’t ask you to insult her.”

“Oh, go to hell.”

He stood up from the table his face white, and stood there white and
angry behind the little plates of hors d’œuvres.

“Sit down,” I said. “Don’t be a fool.”

“You’ve got to take that back.”

“Oh, cut out the prep-school stuff.”

“Take it back.”

“Sure. Anything. I never heard of Brett Ashley. How’s that?

“No. Not that. About me going to hell.”

“Oh, don’t go to hell,” I said. “Stick around. We’re just starting
lunch.”

Cohn smiled again and sat down. He seemed glad to sit down. What the
hell would he have done if he hadn’t sat down? “You say such damned
insulting things, Jake.”

“I’m sorry. I’ve got a nasty tongue. I never mean it when I say nasty
things.”

“I know it,” Cohn said. “You’re really about the best friend I have,
Jake.”

God help you, I thought. “Forget what I said,” I said out loud. “I’m
sorry.”

“It’s all right. It’s fine. I was just sore for a minute.”

“Good. Let’s get something else to eat.”

After we finished the lunch we walked up to the Café de la Paix and had
coffee. I could feel Cohn wanted to bring up Brett again, but I held him
off it. We talked about one thing and another, and I left him to come to
the office.




                                CHAPTER
                                   6


At five o’clock I was in the Hotel Crillon waiting for Brett. She was
not there, so I sat down and wrote some letters. They were not very good
letters but I hoped their being on Crillon stationery would help them.
Brett did not turn up, so about quarter to six I went down to the bar
and had a Jack Rose with George the barman. Brett had not been in the
bar either, and so I looked for her up-stairs on my way out, and took a
taxi to the Café Select. Crossing the Seine I saw a string of barges
being towed empty down the current, riding high, the bargemen at the
sweeps as they came toward the bridge. The river looked nice. It was
always pleasant crossing bridges in Paris.

The taxi rounded the statue of the inventor of the semaphore engaged in
doing same, and turned up the Boulevard Raspail, and I sat back to let
that part of the ride pass. The Boulevard Raspail always made dull
riding. It was like a certain stretch on the P. L. M. between
Fontainebleau and Montereau that always made me feel bored and dead and
dull until it was over. I suppose it is some association of ideas that
makes those dead places in a journey. There are other streets in Paris
as ugly as the Boulevard Raspail. It is a street I do not mind walking
down at all. But I cannot stand to ride along it. Perhaps I had read
something about it once. That was the way Robert Cohn was about all of
Paris. I wondered where Cohn got that incapacity to enjoy Paris.
Possibly from Mencken. Mencken hates Paris, I believe. So many young men
get their likes and dislikes from Mencken.

The taxi stopped in front of the Rotonde. No matter what café in
Montparnasse you ask a taxi-driver to bring you to from the right bank
of the river, they always take you to the Rotonde. Ten years from now it
will probably be the Dome. It was near enough, anyway. I walked past the
sad tables of the Rotonde to the Select. There were a few people inside
at the bar, and outside, alone, sat Harvey Stone. He had a pile of
saucers in front of him, and he needed a shave.

“Sit down,” said Harvey, “I’ve been looking for you.”

“What’s the matter?”

“Nothing. Just looking for you.”

“Been out to the races?”

“No. Not since Sunday.”

“What do you hear from the States?”

“Nothing. Absolutely nothing.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I don’t know. I’m through with them. I’m absolutely through with them.”

He leaned forward and looked me in the eye.

“Do you want to know something, Jake?”

“Yes.”

“I haven’t had anything to eat for five days.”

I figured rapidly back in my mind. It was three days ago that Harvey had
won two hundred francs from me shaking poker dice in the New York Bar.

“What’s the matter?”

“No money. Money hasn’t come,” he paused. “I tell you it’s strange,
Jake. When I’m like this I just want to be alone. I want to stay in my
own room. I’m like a cat.”

I felt in my pocket.

“Would a hundred help you any, Harvey?”

“Yes.”

“Come on. Let’s go and eat.”

“There’s no hurry. Have a drink.”

“Better eat.”

“No. When I get like this I don’t care whether I eat or not.”

We had a drink. Harvey added my saucer to his own pile.

“Do you know Mencken, Harvey?”

“Yes. Why?”

“What’s he like?”

“He’s all right. He says some pretty funny things. Last time I had
dinner with him we talked about Hoffenheimer. ‘The trouble is,’ he said,
‘he’s a garter snapper.’ That’s not bad.”

“That’s not bad.”

“He’s through now,” Harvey went on. “He’s written about all the things
he knows, and now he’s on all the things he doesn’t know.”

“I guess he’s all right,” I said. “I just can’t read him.”

“Oh, nobody reads him now,” Harvey said, “except the people that used to
read the Alexander Hamilton Institute.”

“Well,” I said. “That was a good thing, too.”

“Sure,” said Harvey. So we sat and thought deeply for a while.

“Have another port?”

“All right,” said Harvey.

“There comes Cohn,” I said. Robert Cohn was crossing the street.

“That moron,” said Harvey. Cohn came up to our table.

“Hello, you bums,” he said.

“Hello, Robert,” Harvey said. “I was just telling Jake here that you’re
a moron.”

“What do you mean?”

“Tell us right off. Don’t think. What would you rather do if you could
do anything you wanted?”

Cohn started to consider.

“Don’t think. Bring it right out.”

“I don’t know,” Cohn said. “What’s it all about, anyway?”

“I mean what would you rather do. What comes into your head first. No
matter how silly it is.”

“I don’t know,” Cohn said. “I think I’d rather play football again with
what I know about handling myself, now.”

“I misjudged you,” Harvey said. “You’re not a moron. You’re only a case
of arrested development.”

“You’re awfully funny, Harvey,” Cohn said. “Some day somebody will push
your face in.”

Harvey Stone laughed. “You think so. They won’t, though. Because it
wouldn’t make any difference to me. I’m not a fighter.”

“It would make a difference to you if anybody did it.”

“No, it wouldn’t. That’s where you make your big mistake. Because you’re
not intelligent.”

“Cut it out about me.”

“Sure,” said Harvey. “It doesn’t make any difference to me. You don’t
mean anything to me.”

“Come on, Harvey,” I said. “Have another porto.”

“No,” he said. “I’m going up the street and eat. See you later, Jake.”

He walked out and up the street. I watched him crossing the street
through the taxis, small, heavy, slowly sure of himself in the traffic.

“He always gets me sore,” Cohn said. “I can’t stand him.”

“I like him,” I said. “I’m fond of him. You don’t want to get sore at
him.”

“I know it,” Cohn said. “He just gets on my nerves.”

“Write this afternoon?”

“No. I couldn’t get it going. It’s harder to do than my first book. I’m
having a hard time handling it.”

The sort of healthy conceit that he had when he returned from America
early in the spring was gone. Then he had been sure of his work, only
with these personal longings for adventure. Now the sureness was gone.
Somehow I feel I have not shown Robert Cohn clearly. The reason is that
until he fell in love with Brett, I never heard him make one remark that
would, in any way, detach him from other people. He was nice to watch on
the tennis-court, he had a good body, and he kept it in shape; he
handled his cards well at bridge, and he had a funny sort of
undergraduate quality about him. If he were in a crowd nothing he said
stood out. He wore what used to be called polo shirts at school, and may
be called that still, but he was not professionally youthful. I do not
believe he thought about his clothes much. Externally he had been formed
at Princeton. Internally he had been moulded by the two women who had
trained him. He had a nice, boyish sort of cheerfulness that had never
been trained out of him, and I probably have not brought it out. He
loved to win at tennis. He probably loved to win as much as Lenglen, for
instance. On the other hand, he was not angry at being beaten. When he
fell in love with Brett his tennis game went all to pieces. People beat
him who had never had a chance with him. He was very nice about it.

Anyhow, we were sitting on the terrace of the Café Select, and Harvey
Stone had just crossed the street.

“Come on up to the Lilas,” I said.

“I have a date.”

“What time?”

“Frances is coming here at seven-fifteen.”

“There she is.”

Frances Clyne was coming toward us from across the street. She was a
very tall girl who walked with a great deal of movement. She waved and
smiled. We watched her cross the street.

“Hello,” she said, “I’m so glad you’re here, Jake. I’ve been wanting to
talk to you.”

“Hello, Frances,” said Cohn. He smiled.

“Why, hello, Robert. Are you here?” She went on, talking rapidly. “I’ve
had the darndest time. This one”—shaking her head at Cohn—“didn’t come
home for lunch.”

“I wasn’t supposed to.”

“Oh, I know. But you didn’t say anything about it to the cook. Then I
had a date myself, and Paula wasn’t at her office. I went to the Ritz
and waited for her, and she never came, and of course I didn’t have
enough money to lunch at the Ritz——”

“What did you do?”

“Oh, went out, of course.” She spoke in a sort of imitation joyful
manner. “I always keep my appointments. No one keeps theirs, nowadays. I
ought to know better. How are you, Jake, anyway?”

“Fine.”

“That was a fine girl you had at the dance, and then went off with that
Brett one.”

“Don’t you like her?” Cohn asked.

“I think she’s perfectly charming. Don’t you?”

Cohn said nothing.

“Look, Jake. I want to talk with you. Would you come over with me to the
Dome? You’ll stay here, won’t you, Robert? Come on, Jake.”

We crossed the Boulevard Montparnasse and sat down at a table. A boy
came up with the _Paris Times_, and I bought one and opened it.

“What’s the matter, Frances?”

“Oh, nothing,” she said, “except that he wants to leave me.”

“How do you mean?”

“Oh, he told every one that we were going to be married, and I told my
mother and every one, and now he doesn’t want to do it.”

“What’s the matter?”

“He’s decided he hasn’t lived enough. I knew it would happen when he
went to New York.”

She looked up, very bright-eyed and trying to talk inconsequentially.

“I wouldn’t marry him if he doesn’t want to. Of course I wouldn’t. I
wouldn’t marry him now for anything. But it does seem to me to be a
little late now, after we’ve waited three years, and I’ve just gotten my
divorce.”

I said nothing.

“We were going to celebrate so, and instead we’ve just had scenes. It’s
so childish. We have dreadful scenes, and he cries and begs me to be
reasonable, but he says he just can’t do it.”

“It’s rotten luck.”

“I should say it is rotten luck. I’ve wasted two years and a half on him
now. And I don’t know now if any man will ever want to marry me. Two
years ago I could have married anybody I wanted, down at Cannes. All the
old ones that wanted to marry somebody chic and settle down were crazy
about me. Now I don’t think I could get anybody.”

“Sure, you could marry anybody.”

“No, I don’t believe it. And I’m fond of him, too. And I’d like to have
children. I always thought we’d have children.”

She looked at me very brightly. “I never liked children much, but I
don’t want to think I’ll never have them. I always thought I’d have them
and then like them.”

“He’s got children.”

“Oh, yes. He’s got children, and he’s got money, and he’s got a rich
mother, and he’s written a book, and nobody will publish my stuff;
nobody at all. It isn’t bad, either. And I haven’t got any money at all.
I could have had alimony, but I got the divorce the quickest way.”

She looked at me again very brightly.

“It isn’t right. It’s my own fault and it’s not, too. I ought to have
known better. And when I tell him he just cries and says he can’t marry.
Why can’t he marry? I’d be a good wife. I’m easy to get along with. I
leave him alone. It doesn’t do any good.”

“It’s a rotten shame.”

“Yes, it is a rotten shame. But there’s no use talking about it, is
there? Come on, let’s go back to the café.”

“And of course there isn’t anything I can do.”

“No. Just don’t let him know I talked to you. I know what he wants.” Now
for the first time she dropped her bright, terribly cheerful manner. “He
wants to go back to New York alone, and be there when his book comes out
so when a lot of little chickens like it. That’s what he wants.”

“Maybe they won’t like it. I don’t think he’s that way. Really.”

“You don’t know him like I do, Jake. That’s what he wants to do. I know
it. I know it. That’s why he doesn’t want to marry. He wants to have a
big triumph this fall all by himself.”

“Want to go back to the café?”

“Yes. Come on.”

We got up from the table—they had never brought us a drink—and started
across the street toward the Select, where Cohn sat smiling at us from
behind the marble-topped table.

“Well, what are you smiling at?” Frances asked him. “Feel pretty happy?”

“I was smiling at you and Jake with your secrets.”

“Oh, what I’ve told Jake isn’t any secret. Everybody will know it soon
enough. I only wanted to give Jake a decent version.”

“What was it? About your going to England?”

“Yes, about my going to England. Oh, Jake! I forgot to tell you. I’m
going to England.”

“Isn’t that fine!”

“Yes, that’s the way it’s done in the very best families. Robert’s
sending me. He’s going to give me two hundred pounds and then I’m going
to visit friends. Won’t it be lovely? The friends don’t know about it,
yet.”

She turned to Cohn and smiled at him. He was not smiling now.

“You were only going to give me a hundred pounds, weren’t you, Robert?
But I made him give me two hundred. He’s really very generous. Aren’t
you, Robert?”

I do not know how people could say such terrible things to Robert Cohn.
There are people to whom you could not say insulting things. They give
you a feeling that the world would be destroyed, would actually be
destroyed before your eyes, if you said certain things. But here was
Cohn taking it all. Here it was, all going on right before me, and I did
not even feel an impulse to try and stop it. And this was friendly
joking to what went on later.

“How can you say such things, Frances?” Cohn interrupted.

“Listen to him. I’m going to England. I’m going to visit friends. Ever
visit friends that didn’t want you? Oh, they’ll have to take me, all
right. ‘How do you do, my dear? Such a long time since we’ve seen you.
And how is your dear mother?’ Yes, how is my dear mother? She put all
her money into French war bonds. Yes, she did. Probably the only person
in the world that did. ‘And what about Robert?’ or else very careful
talking around Robert. ‘You must be most careful not to mention him, my
dear. Poor Frances has had a most unfortunate experience.’ Won’t it be
fun, Robert? Don’t you think it will be fun, Jake?”

She turned to me with that terribly bright smile. It was very
satisfactory to her to have an audience for this.

“And where are you going to be, Robert? It’s my own fault, all right.
Perfectly my own fault. When I made you get rid of your little secretary
on the magazine I ought to have known you’d get rid of me the same way.
Jake doesn’t know about that. Should I tell him?”

“Shut up, Frances, for God’s sake.”

“Yes, I’ll tell him. Robert had a little secretary on the magazine. Just
the sweetest little thing in the world, and he thought she was
wonderful, and then I came along and he thought I was pretty wonderful,
too. So I made him get rid of her, and he had brought her to
Provincetown from Carmel when he moved the magazine, and he didn’t even
pay her fare back to the coast. All to please me. He thought I was
pretty fine, then. Didn’t you, Robert?

“You mustn’t misunderstand, Jake, it was absolutely platonic with the
secretary. Not even platonic. Nothing at all, really. It was just that
she was so nice. And he did that just to please me. Well, I suppose that
we that live by the sword shall perish by the sword. Isn’t that
literary, though? You want to remember that for your next book, Robert.

“You know Robert is going to get material for a new book. Aren’t you,
Robert? That’s why he’s leaving me. He’s decided I don’t film well. You
see, he was so busy all the time that we were living together, writing
on this book, that he doesn’t remember anything about us. So now he’s
going out and get some new material. Well, I hope he gets something
frightfully interesting.

“Listen, Robert, dear. Let me tell you something. You won’t mind, will
you? Don’t have scenes with your young ladies. Try not to. Because you
can’t have scenes without crying, and then you pity yourself so much you
can’t remember what the other person’s said. You’ll never be able to
remember any conversations that way. Just try and be calm. I know it’s
awfully hard. But remember, it’s for literature. We all ought to make
sacrifices for literature. Look at me. I’m going to England without a
protest. All for literature. We must all help young writers. Don’t you
think so, Jake? But you’re not a young writer. Are you, Robert? You’re
thirty-four. Still, I suppose that is young for a great writer. Look at
Hardy. Look at Anatole France. He just died a little while ago. Robert
doesn’t think he’s any good, though. Some of his French friends told
him. He doesn’t read French very well himself. He wasn’t a good writer
like you are, was he, Robert? Do you think he ever had to go and look
for material? What do you suppose he said to his mistresses when he
wouldn’t marry them? I wonder if he cried, too? Oh, I’ve just thought of
something.” She put her gloved hand up to her lips. “I know the real
reason why Robert won’t marry me, Jake. It’s just come to me. They’ve
sent it to me in a vision in the Café Select. Isn’t it mystic? Some day
they’ll put a tablet up. Like at Lourdes. Do you want to hear, Robert?
I’ll tell you. It’s so simple. I wonder why I never thought about it.
Why, you see, Robert’s always wanted to have a mistress, and if he
doesn’t marry me, why, then he’s had one. She was his mistress for over
two years. See how it is? And if he marries me, like he’s always
promised he would, that would be the end of all the romance. Don’t you
think that’s bright of me to figure that out? It’s true, too. Look at
him and see if it’s not. Where are you going, Jake?”

“I’ve got to go in and see Harvey Stone a minute.”

Cohn looked up as I went in. His face was white. Why did he sit there?
Why did he keep on taking it like that?

As I stood against the bar looking out I could see them through the
window. Frances was talking on to him, smiling brightly, looking into
his face each time she asked: “Isn’t it so, Robert?” Or maybe she did
not ask that now. Perhaps she said something else. I told the barman I
did not want anything to drink and went out through the side door. As I
went out the door I looked back through the two thicknesses of glass and
saw them sitting there. She was still talking to him. I went down a side
street to the Boulevard Raspail. A taxi came along and I got in and gave
the driver the address of my flat.




                                CHAPTER
                                   7


As I started up the stairs the concierge knocked on the glass of the
door of her lodge, and as I stopped she came out. She had some letters
and a telegram.

“Here is the post. And there was a lady here to see you.”

“Did she leave a card?”

“No. She was with a gentleman. It was the one who was here last night.
In the end I find she is very nice.”

“Was she with a friend of mine?”

“I don’t know. He was never here before. He was very large. Very, very
large. She was very nice. Very, very nice. Last night she was, perhaps,
a little—” She put her head on one hand and rocked it up and down.
“I’ll speak perfectly frankly, Monsieur Barnes. Last night I found her
not so gentille. Last night I formed another idea of her. But listen to
what I tell you. She is très, très gentille. She is of very good family.
It is a thing you can see.”

“They did not leave any word?”

“Yes. They said they would be back in an hour.”

“Send them up when they come.”

“Yes, Monsieur Barnes. And that lady, that lady there is some one. An
eccentric, perhaps, but quelqu’une, quelqu’une!”

The concierge, before she became a concierge, had owned a drink-selling
concession at the Paris race-courses. Her life-work lay in the pelouse,
but she kept an eye on the people of the pesage, and she took great
pride in telling me which of my guests were well brought up, which were
of good family, who were sportsmen, a French word pronounced with the
accent on the men. The only trouble was that people who did not fall
into any of those three categories were very liable to be told there was
no one home, chez Barnes. One of my friends, an extremely
underfed-looking painter, who was obviously to Madame Duzinell neither
well brought up, of good family, nor a sportsman, wrote me a letter
asking if I could get him a pass to get by the concierge so he could
come up and see me occasionally in the evenings.

I went up to the flat wondering what Brett had done to the concierge.
The wire was a cable from Bill Gorton, saying he was arriving on the
_France_. I put the mail on the table, went back to the bedroom,
undressed and had a shower. I was rubbing down when I heard the
door-bell pull. I put on a bathrobe and slippers and went to the door.
It was Brett. Back of her was the count. He was holding a great bunch of
roses.

“Hello, darling,” said Brett. “Aren’t you going to let us in?”

“Come on. I was just bathing.”

“Aren’t you the fortunate man. Bathing.”

“Only a shower. Sit down, Count Mippipopolous. What will you drink?”

“I don’t know whether you like flowers, sir,” the count said, “but I
took the liberty of just bringing these roses.”

“Here, give them to me.” Brett took them. “Get me some water in this,
Jake.” I filled the big earthenware jug with water in the kitchen, and
Brett put the roses in it, and placed them in the centre of the
dining-room table.

“I say. We have had a day.”

“You don’t remember anything about a date with me at the Crillon?”

“No. Did we have one? I must have been blind.”

“You were quite drunk, my dear,” said the count.

“Wasn’t I, though? And the count’s been a brick, absolutely.”

“You’ve got hell’s own drag with the concierge now.”

“I ought to have. Gave her two hundred francs.”

“Don’t be a damned fool.”

“His,” she said, and nodded at the count.

“I thought we ought to give her a little something for last night. It
was very late.”

“He’s wonderful,” Brett said. “He remembers everything that’s happened.”

“So do you, my dear.”

“Fancy,” said Brett. “Who’d want to? I say, Jake, _do_ we get a drink?”

“You get it while I go in and dress. You know where it is.”

“Rather.”

While I dressed I heard Brett put down glasses and then a siphon, and
then heard them talking. I dressed slowly, sitting on the bed. I felt
tired and pretty rotten. Brett came in the room, a glass in her hand,
and sat on the bed.

“What’s the matter, darling? Do you feel rocky?”

She kissed me coolly on the forehead.

“Oh, Brett, I love you so much.”

“Darling,” she said. Then: “Do you want me to send him away?”

“No. He’s nice.”

“I’ll send him away.”

“No, don’t.”

“Yes, I’ll send him away.”

“You can’t just like that.”

“Can’t I, though? You stay here. He’s mad about me, I tell you.”

She was gone out of the room. I lay face down on the bed. I was having a
bad time. I heard them talking but I did not listen. Brett came in and
sat on the bed.

“Poor old darling.” She stroked my head.

“What did you say to him?” I was lying with my face away from her. I did
not want to see her.

“Sent him for champagne. He loves to go for champagne.”

Then later: “Do you feel better, darling? Is the head any better?”

“It’s better.”

“Lie quiet. He’s gone to the other side of town.”

“Couldn’t we live together, Brett? Couldn’t we just live together?”

“I don’t think so. I’d just _tromper_ you with everybody. You couldn’t
stand it.”

“I stand it now.”

“That would be different. It’s my fault, Jake. It’s the way I’m made.”

“Couldn’t we go off in the country for a while?”

“It wouldn’t be any good. I’ll go if you like. But I couldn’t live
quietly in the country. Not with my own true love.”

“I know.”

“Isn’t it rotten? There isn’t any use my telling you I love you.”

“You know I love you.”

“Let’s not talk. Talking’s all bilge. I’m going away from you, and then
Michael’s coming back.”

“Why are you going away?”

“Better for you. Better for me.”

“When are you going?”

“Soon as I can.”

“Where?”

“San Sebastian.”

“Can’t we go together?”

“No. That would be a hell of an idea after we’d just talked it out.”

“We never agreed.”

“Oh, you know as well as I do. Don’t be obstinate, darling.”

“Oh, sure,” I said. “I know you’re right. I’m just low, and when I’m low
I talk like a fool.”

I sat up, leaned over, found my shoes beside the bed and put them on. I
stood up.

“Don’t look like that, darling.”

“How do you want me to look?”

“Oh, don’t be a fool. I’m going away to-morrow.”

“To-morrow?”

“Yes. Didn’t I say so? I am.”

“Let’s have a drink, then. The count will be back.”

“Yes. He should be back. You know he’s extraordinary about buying
champagne. It means any amount to him.”

We went into the dining-room. I took up the brandy bottle and poured
Brett a drink and one for myself. There was a ring at the bell-pull. I
went to the door and there was the count. Behind him was the chauffeur
carrying a basket of champagne.

“Where should I have him put it, sir?” asked the count.

“In the kitchen,” Brett said.

“Put it in there, Henry,” the count motioned. “Now go down and get the
ice.” He stood looking after the basket inside the kitchen door. “I
think you’ll find that’s very good wine,” he said. “I know we don’t get
much of a chance to judge good wine in the States now, but I got this
from a friend of mine that’s in the business.”

“Oh, you always have some one in the trade,” Brett said.

“This fellow raises the grapes. He’s got thousands of acres of them.”

“What’s his name?” asked Brett. “Veuve Cliquot?”

“No,” said the count. “Mumms. He’s a baron.”

“Isn’t it wonderful,” said Brett. “We all have titles. Why haven’t you a
title, Jake?”

“I assure you, sir,” the count put his hand on my arm. “It never does a
man any good. Most of the time it costs you money.”

“Oh, I don’t know. It’s damned useful sometimes,” Brett said.

“I’ve never known it to do me any good.”

“You haven’t used it properly. I’ve had hell’s own amount of credit on
mine.”

“Do sit down, count,” I said. “Let me take that stick.”

The count was looking at Brett across the table under the gas-light. She
was smoking a cigarette and flicking the ashes on the rug. She saw me
notice it. “I say, Jake, I don’t want to ruin your rugs. Can’t you give
a chap an ash-tray?”

I found some ash-trays and spread them around. The chauffeur came up
with a bucket full of salted ice. “Put two bottles in it, Henry,” the
count called.

“Anything else, sir?”

“No. Wait down in the car.” He turned to Brett and to me. “We’ll want to
ride out to the Bois for dinner?”

“If you like,” Brett said. “I couldn’t eat a thing.”

“I always like a good meal,” said the count.

“Should I bring the wine in, sir?” asked the chauffeur.

“Yes. Bring it in, Henry,” said the count. He took out a heavy pigskin
cigar-case and offered it to me. “Like to try a real American cigar?”

“Thanks,” I said. “I’ll finish the cigarette.”

He cut off the end of his cigar with a gold cutter he wore on one end of
his watch-chain.

“I like a cigar to really draw,” said the count “Half the cigars you
smoke don’t draw.”

He lit the cigar, puffed at it, looking across the table at Brett. “And
when you’re divorced, Lady Ashley, then you won’t have a title.”

“No. What a pity.”

“No,” said the count. “You don’t need a title. You got class all over
you.”

“Thanks. Awfully decent of you.”

“I’m not joking you,” the count blew a cloud of smoke. “You got the most
class of anybody I ever seen. You got it. That’s all.”

“Nice of you,” said Brett. “Mummy would be pleased. Couldn’t you write
it out, and I’ll send it in a letter to her.”

“I’d tell her, too,” said the count. “I’m not joking you. I never joke
people. Joke people and you make enemies. That’s what I always say.”

“You’re right,” Brett said. “You’re terribly right. I always joke people
and I haven’t a friend in the world. Except Jake here.”

“You don’t joke him.”

“That’s it.”

“Do you, now?” asked the count. “Do you joke him?”

Brett looked at me and wrinkled up the corners of her eyes.

“No,” she said. “I wouldn’t joke him.”

“See,” said the count. “You don’t joke him.”

“This is a hell of a dull talk,” Brett said. “How about some of that
champagne?”

The count reached down and twirled the bottles in the shiny bucket. “It
isn’t cold, yet. You’re always drinking, my dear. Why don’t you just
talk?”

“I’ve talked too ruddy much. I’ve talked myself all out to Jake.”

“I should like to hear you really talk, my dear. When you talk to me you
never finish your sentences at all.”

“Leave ’em for you to finish. Let any one finish them as they like.”

“It is a very interesting system,” the count reached down and gave the
bottles a twirl. “Still I would like to hear you talk some time.”

“Isn’t he a fool?” Brett asked.

“Now,” the count brought up a bottle. “I think this is cool.”

I brought a towel and he wiped the bottle dry and held it up. “I like to
drink champagne from magnums. The wine is better but it would have been
too hard to cool.” He held the bottle, looking at it. I put out the
glasses.

“I say. You might open it,” Brett suggested.

“Yes, my dear. Now I’ll open it.”

It was amazing champagne.

“I say that is wine,” Brett held up her glass. “We ought to toast
something. ‘Here’s to royalty.’”

“This wine is too good for toast-drinking, my dear. You don’t want to
mix emotions up with a wine like that. You lose the taste.”

Brett’s glass was empty.

“You ought to write a book on wines, count,” I said.

“Mr. Barnes,” answered the count, “all I want out of wines is to enjoy
them.”

“Let’s enjoy a little more of this,” Brett pushed her glass forward. The
count poured very carefully. “There, my dear. Now you enjoy that slowly,
and then you can get drunk.”

“Drunk? Drunk?”

“My dear, you are charming when you are drunk.”

“Listen to the man.”

“Mr. Barnes,” the count poured my glass full. “She is the only lady I
have ever known who was as charming when she was drunk as when she was
sober.”

“You haven’t been around much, have you?”

“Yes, my dear. I have been around very much. I have been around a very
great deal.”

“Drink your wine,” said Brett. “We’ve all been around. I dare say Jake
here has seen as much as you have.”

“My dear, I am sure Mr. Barnes has seen a lot. Don’t think I don’t think
so, sir. I have seen a lot, too.”

“Of course you have, my dear,” Brett said. “I was only ragging.”

“I have been in seven wars and four revolutions,” the count said.

“Soldiering?” Brett asked.

“Sometimes, my dear. And I have got arrow wounds. Have you ever seen
arrow wounds?”

“Let’s have a look at them.”

The count stood up, unbuttoned his vest, and opened his shirt. He pulled
up the undershirt onto his chest and stood, his chest black, and big
stomach muscles bulging under the light.

“You see them?”

Below the line where his ribs stopped were two raised white welts. “See
on the back where they come out.” Above the small of the back were the
same two scars, raised as thick as a finger.

“I say. Those are something.”

“Clean through.”

The count was tucking in his shirt.

“Where did you get those?” I asked.

“In Abyssinia. When I was twenty-one years old.”

“What were you doing?” asked Brett. “Were you in the army?”

“I was on a business trip, my dear.”

“I told you he was one of us. Didn’t I?” Brett turned to me. “I love
you, count. You’re a darling.”

“You make me very happy, my dear. But it isn’t true.”

“Don’t be an ass.”

“You see, Mr. Barnes, it is because I have lived very much that now I
can enjoy everything so well. Don’t you find it like that?”

“Yes. Absolutely.”

“I know,” said the count. “That is the secret. You must get to know the
values.”

“Doesn’t anything ever happen to your values?” Brett asked.

“No. Not any more.”

“Never fall in love?”

“Always,” said the count. “I am always in love.”

“What does that do to your values?”

“That, too, has got a place in my values.”

“You haven’t any values. You’re dead, that’s all.”

“No, my dear. You’re not right. I’m not dead at all.”

We drank three bottles of the champagne and the count left the basket in
my kitchen. We dined at a restaurant in the Bois. It was a good dinner.
Food had an excellent place in the count’s values. So did wine. The
count was in fine form during the meal. So was Brett. It was a good
party.

“Where would you like to go?” asked the count after dinner. We were the
only people left in the restaurant. The two waiters were standing over
against the door. They wanted to go home.

“We might go up on the hill,” Brett said. “Haven’t we had a splendid
party?”

The count was beaming. He was very happy.

“You are very nice people,” he said. He was smoking a cigar again. “Why
don’t you get married, you two?”

“We want to lead our own lives,” I said.

“We have our careers,” Brett said. “Come on. Let’s get out of this.”

“Have another brandy,” the count said.

“Get it on the hill.”

“No. Have it here where it is quiet.”

“You and your quiet,” said Brett. “What is it men feel about quiet?”

“We like it,” said the count. “Like you like noise, my dear.”

“All right,” said Brett. “Let’s have one.”

“Sommelier!” the count called.

“Yes, sir.”

“What is the oldest brandy you have?”

“Eighteen eleven, sir.”

“Bring us a bottle.”

“I say. Don’t be ostentatious. Call him off, Jake.”

“Listen, my dear. I get more value for my money in old brandy than in
any other antiquities.”

“Got many antiquities?”

“I got a houseful.”

Finally we went up to Montmartre. Inside Zelli’s it was crowded, smoky,
and noisy. The music hit you as you went in. Brett and I danced. It was
so crowded we could barely move. The nigger drummer waved at Brett. We
were caught in the jam, dancing in one place in front of him.

“Hahre you?”

“Great.”

“Thaats good.”

He was all teeth and lips.

“He’s a great friend of mine,” Brett said. “Damn good drummer.”

The music stopped and we started toward the table where the count sat.
Then the music started again and we danced. I looked at the count. He
was sitting at the table smoking a cigar. The music stopped again.

“Let’s go over.”

Brett started toward the table. The music started and again we danced,
tight in the crowd.

“You are a rotten dancer, Jake. Michael’s the best dancer I know.”

“He’s splendid.”

“He’s got his points.”

“I like him,” I said. “I’m damned fond of him.”

“I’m going to marry him,” Brett said. “Funny. I haven’t thought about
him for a week.”

“Don’t you write him?”

“Not I. Never write letters.”

“I’ll bet he writes to you.”

“Rather. Damned good letters, too.”

“When are you going to get married?”

“How do I know? As soon as we can get the divorce. Michael’s trying to
get his mother to put up for it.”

“Could I help you?”

“Don’t be an ass. Michael’s people have loads of money.”

The music stopped. We walked over to the table. The count stood up.

“Very nice,” he said. “You looked very, very nice.”

“Don’t you dance, count?” I asked.

“No. I’m too old.”

“Oh, come off it,” Brett said.

“My dear, I would do it if I would enjoy it. I enjoy to watch you
dance.”

“Splendid,” Brett said. “I’ll dance again for you some time. I say. What
about your little friend, Zizi?”

“Let me tell you. I support that boy, but I don’t want to have him
around.”

“He is rather hard.”

“You know I think that boy’s got a future. But personally I don’t want
him around.”

“Jake’s rather the same way.”

“He gives me the willys.”

“Well,” the count shrugged his shoulders. “About his future you can’t
ever tell. Anyhow, his father was a great friend of my father.”

“Come on. Let’s dance,” Brett said.

We danced. It was crowded and close.

“Oh, darling,” Brett said, “I’m so miserable.”

I had that feeling of going through something that has all happened
before. “You were happy a minute ago.”

The drummer shouted: “You can’t two time—”

“It’s all gone.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I don’t know. I just feel terribly.”

“. . . . . .” the drummer chanted. Then turned to his sticks.

“Want to go?”

I had the feeling as in a nightmare of it all being something repeated,
something I had been through and that now I must go through again.

“. . . . . .” the drummer sang softly.

“Let’s go,” said Brett. “You don’t mind.”

“. . . . . .” the drummer shouted and grinned at Brett.

“All right,” I said. We got out from the crowd. Brett went to the
dressing-room.

“Brett wants to go,” I said to the count. He nodded. “Does she? That’s
fine. You take the car. I’m going to stay here for a while, Mr. Barnes.”

We shook hands.

“It was a wonderful time,” I said. “I wish you would let me get this.” I
took a note out of my pocket.

“Mr. Barnes, don’t be ridiculous,” the count said.

Brett came over with her wrap on. She kissed the count and put her hand
on his shoulder to keep him from standing up. As we went out the door I
looked back and there were three girls at his table. We got into the big
car. Brett gave the chauffeur the address of her hotel.

“No, don’t come up,” she said at the hotel. She had rung and the door
was unlatched.

“Really?”

“No. Please.”

“Good night, Brett,” I said. “I’m sorry you feel rotten.”

“Good night, Jake. Good night, darling. I won’t see you again.” We
kissed standing at the door. She pushed me away. We kissed again. “Oh,
don’t!” Brett said.

She turned quickly and went into the hotel. The chauffeur drove me
around to my flat. I gave him twenty francs and he touched his cap and
said: “Good night, sir,” and drove off. I rang the bell. The door opened
and I went up-stairs and went to bed.




                                BOOK II




                                CHAPTER
                                   8


I did not see Brett again until she came back from San Sebastian. One
card came from her from there. It had a picture of the Concha, and said:
“Darling. Very quiet and healthy. Love to all the chaps. BRETT.”

Nor did I see Robert Cohn again. I heard Frances had left for England
and I had a note from Cohn saying he was going out in the country for a
couple of weeks, he did not know where, but that he wanted to hold me to
the fishing-trip in Spain we had talked about last winter. I could reach
him always, he wrote, through his bankers.

Brett was gone, I was not bothered by Cohn’s troubles, I rather enjoyed
not having to play tennis, there was plenty of work to do, I went often
to the races, dined with friends, and put in some extra time at the
office getting things ahead so I could leave it in charge of my
secretary when Bill Gorton and I should shove off to Spain the end of
June. Bill Gorton arrived, put up a couple of days at the flat and went
off to Vienna. He was very cheerful and said the States were wonderful.
New York was wonderful. There had been a grand theatrical season and a
whole crop of great young light heavyweights. Any one of them was a good
prospect to grow up, put on weight and trim Dempsey. Bill was very
happy. He had made a lot of money on his last book, and was going to
make a lot more. We had a good time while he was in Paris, and then he
went off to Vienna. He was coming back in three weeks and we would leave
for Spain to get in some fishing and go to the fiesta at Pamplona. He
wrote that Vienna was wonderful. Then a card from Budapest: “Jake,
Budapest is wonderful.” Then I got a wire: “Back on Monday.”

Monday evening he turned up at the flat. I heard his taxi stop and went
to the window and called to him; he waved and started up-stairs carrying
his bags. I met him on the stairs, and took one of the bags.

“Well,” I said, “I hear you had a wonderful trip.”

“Wonderful,” he said. “Budapest is absolutely wonderful.”

“How about Vienna?”

“Not so good, Jake. Not so good. It seemed better than it was.”

“How do you mean?” I was getting glasses and a siphon.

“Tight, Jake. I was tight.”

“That’s strange. Better have a drink.”

Bill rubbed his forehead. “Remarkable thing,” he said. “Don’t know how
it happened. Suddenly it happened.”

“Last long?”

“Four days, Jake. Lasted just four days.”

“Where did you go?”

“Don’t remember. Wrote you a post-card. Remember that perfectly.”

“Do anything else?”

“Not so sure. Possible.”

“Go on. Tell me about it.”

“Can’t remember. Tell you anything I could remember.”

“Go on. Take that drink and remember.”

“Might remember a little,” Bill said. “Remember something about a
prize-fight. Enormous Vienna prize-fight. Had a nigger in it. Remember
the nigger perfectly.”

“Go on.”

“Wonderful nigger. Looked like Tiger Flowers, only four times as big.
All of a sudden everybody started to throw things. Not me. Nigger’d just
knocked local boy down. Nigger put up his glove. Wanted to make a
speech. Awful noble-looking nigger. Started to make a speech. Then local
white boy hit him. Then he knocked white boy cold. Then everybody
commenced to throw chairs. Nigger went home with us in our car. Couldn’t
get his clothes. Wore my coat. Remember the whole thing now. Big
sporting evening.”

“What happened?”

“Loaned the nigger some clothes and went around with him to try and get
his money. Claimed nigger owed them money on account of wrecking hall.
Wonder who translated? Was it me?”

“Probably it wasn’t you.”

“You’re right. Wasn’t me at all. Was another fellow. Think we called him
the local Harvard man. Remember him now. Studying music.”

“How’d you come out?”

“Not so good, Jake. Injustice everywhere. Promoter claimed nigger
promised let local boy stay. Claimed nigger violated contract. Can’t
knock out Vienna boy in Vienna. ‘My God, Mister Gorton,’ said nigger, ‘I
didn’t do nothing in there for forty minutes but try and let him stay.
That white boy musta ruptured himself swinging at me. I never did hit
him.’”

“Did you get any money?”

“No money, Jake. All we could get was nigger’s clothes. Somebody took
his watch, too. Splendid nigger. Big mistake to have come to Vienna. Not
so good, Jake. Not so good.”

“What became of the nigger?”

“Went back to Cologne. Lives there. Married. Got a family. Going to
write me a letter and send me the money I loaned him. Wonderful nigger.
Hope I gave him the right address.”

“You probably did.”

“Well, anyway, let’s eat,” said Bill. “Unless you want me to tell you
some more travel stories.”

“Go on.”

“Let’s eat.”

We went down-stairs and out onto the Boulevard St. Michel in the warm
June evening.

“Where will we go?”

“Want to eat on the island?”

“Sure.”

We walked down the Boulevard. At the juncture of the Rue
Denfert-Rochereau with the Boulevard is a statue of two men in flowing
robes.

“I know who they are.” Bill eyed the monument. “Gentlemen who invented
pharmacy. Don’t try and fool me on Paris.”

We went on.

“Here’s a taxidermist’s,” Bill said. “Want to buy anything? Nice stuffed
dog?”

“Come on,” I said. “You’re pie-eyed.”

“Pretty nice stuffed dogs,” Bill said. “Certainly brighten up your
flat.”

“Come on.”

“Just one stuffed dog. I can take ’em or leave ’em alone. But listen,
Jake. Just one stuffed dog.”

“Come on.”

“Mean everything in the world to you after you bought it. Simple
exchange of values. You give them money. They give you a stuffed dog.”

“We’ll get one on the way back.”

“All right. Have it your own way. Road to hell paved with unbought
stuffed dogs. Not my fault.”

We went on.

“How’d you feel that way about dogs so sudden?”

“Always felt that way about dogs. Always been a great lover of stuffed
animals.”

We stopped and had a drink.

“Certainly like to drink,” Bill said. “You ought to try it some times,
Jake.”

“You’re about a hundred and forty-four ahead of me.”

“Ought not to daunt you. Never be daunted. Secret of my success. Never
been daunted. Never been daunted in public.”

“Where were you drinking?”

“Stopped at the Crillon. George made me a couple of Jack Roses. George’s
a great man. Know the secret of his success? Never been daunted.”

“You’ll be daunted after about three more pernods.”

“Not in public. If I begin to feel daunted I’ll go off by myself. I’m
like a cat that way.”

“When did you see Harvey Stone?”

“At the Crillon. Harvey was just a little daunted. Hadn’t eaten for
three days. Doesn’t eat any more. Just goes off like a cat. Pretty sad.”

“He’s all right.”

“Splendid. Wish he wouldn’t keep going off like a cat, though. Makes me
nervous.”

“What’ll we do to-night?”

“Doesn’t make any difference. Only let’s not get daunted. Suppose they
got any hard-boiled eggs here? If they had hard-boiled eggs here we
wouldn’t have to go all the way down to the island to eat.”

“Nix,” I said. “We’re going to have a regular meal.”

“Just a suggestion,” said Bill. “Want to start now?”

“Come on.”

We started on again down the Boulevard. A horse-cab passed us. Bill
looked at it.

“See that horse-cab? Going to have that horse-cab stuffed for you for
Christmas. Going to give all my friends stuffed animals. I’m a
nature-writer.”

A taxi passed, some one in it waved, then banged for the driver to stop.
The taxi backed up to the curb. In it was Brett.

“Beautiful lady,” said Bill. “Going to kidnap us.”

“Hullo!” Brett said. “Hullo!”

“This is Bill Gorton. Lady Ashley.”

Brett smiled at Bill. “I say I’m just back. Haven’t bathed even. Michael
comes in to-night.”

“Good. Come on and eat with us, and we’ll all go to meet him.”

“Must clean myself.”

“Oh, rot! Come on.”

“Must bathe. He doesn’t get in till nine.”

“Come and have a drink, then, before you bathe.”

“Might do that. Now you’re not talking rot.”

We got in the taxi. The driver looked around.

“Stop at the nearest bistro,” I said.

“We might as well go to the Closerie,” Brett said. “I can’t drink these
rotten brandies.”

“Closerie des Lilas.”

Brett turned to Bill.

“Have you been in this pestilential city long?”

“Just got in to-day from Budapest.”

“How was Budapest?”

“Wonderful. Budapest was wonderful.”

“Ask him about Vienna.”

“Vienna,” said Bill, “is a strange city.”

“Very much like Paris,” Brett smiled at him, wrinkling the corners of
her eyes.

“Exactly,” Bill said. “Very much like Paris at this moment.”

“You _have_ a good start.”

Sitting out on the terraces of the Lilas Brett ordered a whiskey and
soda, I took one, too, and Bill took another pernod.

“How are you, Jake?”

“Great,” I said. “I’ve had a good time.”

Brett looked at me. “I was a fool to go away,” she said. “One’s an ass
to leave Paris.”

“Did you have a good time?”

“Oh, all right. Interesting. Not frightfully amusing.”

“See anybody?”

“No, hardly anybody. I never went out.”

“Didn’t you swim?”

“No. Didn’t do a thing.”

“Sounds like Vienna,” Bill said.

Brett wrinkled up the corners of her eyes at him.

“So that’s the way it was in Vienna.”

“It was like everything in Vienna.”

Brett smiled at him again.

“You’ve a nice friend, Jake.”

“He’s all right,” I said. “He’s a taxidermist.”

“That was in another country,” Bill said. “And besides all the animals
were dead.”

“One more,” Brett said, “and I must run. Do send the waiter for a taxi.”

“There’s a line of them. Right out in front.”

“Good.”

We had the drink and put Brett into her taxi.

“Mind you’re at the Select around ten. Make him come. Michael will be
there.”

“We’ll be there,” Bill said. The taxi started and Brett waved.

“Quite a girl,” Bill said. “She’s damned nice. Who’s Michael?”

“The man she’s going to marry.”

“Well, well,” Bill said. “That’s always just the stage I meet anybody.
What’ll I send them? Think they’d like a couple of stuffed race-horses?”

“We better eat.”

“Is she really Lady something or other?” Bill asked in the taxi on our
way down to the Ile Saint Louis.

“Oh, yes. In the stud-book and everything.”

“Well, well.”

We ate dinner at Madame Lecomte’s restaurant on the far side of the
island. It was crowded with Americans and we had to stand up and wait
for a place. Some one had put it in the American Women’s Club list as a
quaint restaurant on the Paris quais as yet untouched by Americans, so
we had to wait forty-five minutes for a table. Bill had eaten at the
restaurant in 1918, and right after the armistice, and Madame Lecomte
made a great fuss over seeing him.

“Doesn’t get us a table, though,” Bill said. “Grand woman, though.”

We had a good meal, a roast chicken, new green beans, mashed potatoes, a
salad, and some apple-pie and cheese.

“You’ve got the world here all right,” Bill said to Madame Lecomte. She
raised her hand. “Oh, my God!”

“You’ll be rich.”

“I hope so.”

After the coffee and a _fine_ we got the bill, chalked up the same as
ever on a slate, that was doubtless one of the “quaint” features, paid
it, shook hands, and went out.

“You never come here any more, Monsieur Barnes,” Madame Lecomte said.

“Too many compatriots.”

“Come at lunch-time. It’s not crowded then.”

“Good. I’ll be down soon.”

We walked along under the trees that grew out over the river on the Quai
d’Orléans side of the island. Across the river were the broken walls of
old houses that were being torn down.

“They’re going to cut a street through.”

“They would,” Bill said.

We walked on and circled the island. The river was dark and a bateau
mouche went by, all bright with lights, going fast and quiet up and out
of sight under the bridge. Down the river was Notre Dame squatting
against the night sky. We crossed to the left bank of the Seine by the
wooden foot-bridge from the Quai de Bethune, and stopped on the bridge
and looked down the river at Notre Dame. Standing on the bridge the
island looked dark, the houses were high against the sky, and the trees
were shadows.

“It’s pretty grand,” Bill said. “God, I love to get back.”

We leaned on the wooden rail of the bridge and looked up the river to
the lights of the big bridges. Below the water was smooth and black. It
made no sound against the piles of the bridge. A man and a girl passed
us. They were walking with their arms around each other.

We crossed the bridge and walked up the Rue du Cardinal Lemoine. It was
steep walking, and we went all the way up to the Place Contrescarpe. The
arc-light shone through the leaves of the trees in the square, and
underneath the trees was an S bus ready to start. Music came out of the
door of the Negre Joyeux. Through the window of the Café Aux Amateurs I
saw the long zinc bar. Outside on the terrace working people were
drinking. In the open kitchen of the Amateurs a girl was cooking
potato-chips in oil. There was an iron pot of stew. The girl ladled some
onto a plate for an old man who stood holding a bottle of red wine in
one hand.

“Want to have a drink?”

“No,” said Bill. “I don’t need it.”

We turned to the right off the Place Contrescarpe, walking along smooth
narrow streets with high old houses on both sides. Some of the houses
jutted out toward the street. Others were cut back. We came onto the Rue
du Pot de Fer and followed it along until it brought us to the rigid
north and south of the Rue Saint Jacques and then walked south, past Val
de Grâce, set back behind the courtyard and the iron fence, to the
Boulevard du Port Royal.

“What do you want to do?” I asked. “Go up to the café and see Brett and
Mike?”

“Why not?”

We walked along Port Royal until it became Montparnasse, and then on
past the Lilas, Lavigne’s, and all the little cafés, Damoy’s, crossed
the street to the Rotonde, past its lights and tables to the Select.

Michael came toward us from the tables. He was tanned and
healthy-looking.

“Hel-lo, Jake,” he said. “Hel-lo! Hel-lo! How are you, old lad?”

“You look very fit, Mike.”

“Oh, I am. I’m frightfully fit. I’ve done nothing but walk. Walk all day
long. One drink a day with my mother at tea.”

Bill had gone into the bar. He was standing talking with Brett, who was
sitting on a high stool, her legs crossed. She had no stockings on.

“It’s good to see you, Jake,” Michael said. “I’m a little tight you
know. Amazing, isn’t it? Did you see my nose?”

There was a patch of dried blood on the bridge of his nose.

“An old lady’s bags did that,” Mike said. “I reached up to help her with
them and they fell on me.”

Brett gestured at him from the bar with her cigarette-holder and
wrinkled the corners of her eyes.

“An old lady,” said Mike. “Her bags _fell_ on me. Let’s go in and see
Brett. I say, she is a piece. You _are_ a lovely lady, Brett. Where did
you get that hat?”

“Chap bought it for me. Don’t you like it?”

“It’s a dreadful hat. Do get a good hat.”

“Oh, we’ve so much money now,” Brett said. “I say, haven’t you met Bill
yet? You _are_ a lovely host, Jake.”

She turned to Mike. “This is Bill Gorton. This drunkard is Mike
Campbell. Mr. Campbell is an undischarged bankrupt.”

“Aren’t I, though? You know I met my ex-partner yesterday in London.
Chap who did me in.”

“What did he say?”

“Bought me a drink. I thought I might as well take it. I say, Brett, you
_are_ a lovely piece. Don’t you think she’s beautiful?”

“Beautiful. With this nose?”

“It’s a lovely nose. Go on, point it at me. Isn’t she a lovely piece?”

“Couldn’t we have kept the man in Scotland?”

“I say, Brett, let’s turn in early.”

“Don’t be indecent, Michael. Remember there are ladies at this bar.”

“Isn’t she a lovely piece? Don’t you think so, Jake?”

“There’s a fight to-night,” Bill said. “Like to go?”

“Fight,” said Mike. “Who’s fighting?”

“Ledoux and somebody.”

“He’s very good, Ledoux,” Mike said. “I’d like to see it, rather”—he
was making an effort to pull himself together—“but I can’t go. I had a
date with this thing here. I say, Brett, do get a new hat.”

Brett pulled the felt hat down far over one eye and smiled out from
under it. “You two run along to the fight. I’ll have to be taking Mr.
Campbell home directly.”

“I’m not tight,” Mike said. “Perhaps just a little. I say, Brett, you
are a lovely piece.”

“Go on to the fight,” Brett said. “Mr. Campbell’s getting difficult.
What are these outbursts of affection, Michael?”

“I say, you are a lovely piece.”

We said good night. “I’m sorry I can’t go,” Mike said. Brett laughed. I
looked back from the door. Mike had one hand on the bar and was leaning
toward Brett, talking. Brett was looking at him quite coolly, but the
corners of her eyes were smiling.

Outside on the pavement I said: “Do you want to go to the fight?”

“Sure,” said Bill. “If we don’t have to walk.”

“Mike was pretty excited about his girl friend,” I said in the taxi.

“Well,” said Bill. “You can’t blame him such a hell of a lot.”




                                CHAPTER
                                   9


The Ledoux-Kid Francis fight was the night of the 20th of June. It was a
good fight. The morning after the fight I had a letter from Robert Cohn,
written from Hendaye. He was having a very quiet time, he said, bathing,
playing some golf and much bridge. Hendaye had a splendid beach, but he
was anxious to start on the fishing-trip. When would I be down? If I
would buy him a double-tapered line he would pay me when I came down.

That same morning I wrote Cohn from the office that Bill and I would
leave Paris on the 25th unless I wired him otherwise, and would meet him
at Bayonne, where we could get a bus over the mountains to Pamplona. The
same evening about seven o’clock I stopped in at the Select to see
Michael and Brett. They were not there, and I went over to the Dingo.
They were inside sitting at the bar.

“Hello, darling.” Brett put out her hand.

“Hello, Jake,” Mike said. “I understand I was tight last night.”

“Weren’t you, though,” Brett said. “Disgraceful business.”

“Look,” said Mike, “when do you go down to Spain? Would you mind if we
came down with you?”

“It would be grand.”

“You wouldn’t mind, really? I’ve been at Pamplona, you know. Brett’s mad
to go. You’re sure we wouldn’t just be a bloody nuisance?”

“Don’t talk like a fool.”

“I’m a little tight, you know. I wouldn’t ask you like this if I
weren’t. You’re sure you don’t mind?”

“Oh, shut up, Michael,” Brett said. “How can the man say he’d mind now?
I’ll ask him later.”

“But you don’t mind, do you?”

“Don’t ask that again unless you want to make me sore. Bill and I go
down on the morning of the 25th.”

“By the way, where is Bill?” Brett asked.

“He’s out at Chantilly dining with some people.”

“He’s a good chap.”

“Splendid chap,” said Mike. “He is, you know.”

“You don’t remember him,” Brett said.

“I do. Remember him perfectly. Look, Jake, we’ll come down the night of
the 25th. Brett can’t get up in the morning.”

“Indeed not!”

“If our money comes and you’re sure you don’t mind.”

“It will come, all right. I’ll see to that.”

“Tell me what tackle to send for.”

“Get two or three rods with reels, and lines, and some flies.”

“I won’t fish,” Brett put in.

“Get two rods, then, and Bill won’t have to buy one.”

“Right,” said Mike. “I’ll send a wire to the keeper.”

“Won’t it be splendid,” Brett said. “Spain! We _will_ have fun.”

“The 25th. When is that?”

“Saturday.”

“We _will_ have to get ready.”

“I say,” said Mike, “I’m going to the barber’s.”

“I must bathe,” said Brett. “Walk up to the hotel with me, Jake. Be a
good chap.”

“We _have_ got the loveliest hotel,” Mike said. “I think it’s a
brothel!”

“We left our bags here at the Dingo when we got in, and they asked us at
this hotel if we wanted a room for the afternoon only. Seemed
frightfully pleased we were going to stay all night.”

“_I_ believe it’s a brothel,” Mike said. “And _I_ should know.”

“Oh, shut it and go and get your hair cut.”

Mike went out. Brett and I sat on at the bar.

“Have another?”

“Might.”

“I needed that,” Brett said.

We walked up the Rue Delambre.

“I haven’t seen you since I’ve been back,” Brett said.

“No.”

“How _are_ you, Jake?”

“Fine.”

Brett looked at me. “I say,” she said, “is Robert Cohn going on this
trip?”

“Yes. Why?”

“Don’t you think it will be a bit rough on him?”

“Why should it?”

“Who did you think I went down to San Sebastian with?”

“Congratulations,” I said.

We walked along.

“What did you say that for?”

“I don’t know. What would you like me to say?”

We walked along and turned a corner.

“He behaved rather well, too. He gets a little dull.”

“Does he?”

“I rather thought it would be good for him.”

“You might take up social service.”

“Don’t be nasty.”

“I won’t.”

“Didn’t you really know?”

“No,” I said. “I guess I didn’t think about it.”

“Do you think it will be too rough on him?”

“That’s up to him,” I said. “Tell him you’re coming. He can always not
come.”

“I’ll write him and give him a chance to pull out of it.”

I did not see Brett again until the night of the 24th of June.

“Did you hear from Cohn?”

“Rather. He’s keen about it.”

“My God!”

“I thought it was rather odd myself.”

“Says he can’t wait to see me.”

“Does he think you’re coming alone?”

“No. I told him we were all coming down together. Michael and all.”

“He’s wonderful.”

“Isn’t he?”

They expected their money the next day. We arranged to meet at Pamplona.
They would go directly to San Sebastian and take the train from there.
We would all meet at the Montoya in Pamplona. If they did not turn up on
Monday at the latest we would go on ahead up to Burguete in the
mountains, to start fishing. There was a bus to Burguete. I wrote out an
itinerary so they could follow us.

Bill and I took the morning train from the Gare d’Orsay. It was a lovely
day, not too hot, and the country was beautiful from the start. We went
back into the diner and had breakfast. Leaving the dining-car I asked
the conductor for tickets for the first service.

“Nothing until the fifth.”

“What’s this?”

There were never more than two servings of lunch on that train, and
always plenty of places for both of them.

“They’re all reserved,” the dining-car conductor said. “There will be a
fifth service at three-thirty.”

“This is serious,” I said to Bill.

“Give him ten francs.”

“Here,” I said. “We want to eat in the first service.”

The conductor put the ten francs in his pocket.

“Thank you,” he said. “I would advise you gentlemen to get some
sandwiches. All the places for the first four services were reserved at
the office of the company.”

“You’ll go a long way, brother,” Bill said to him in English. “I suppose
if I’d given you five francs you would have advised us to jump off the
train.”

“_Comment?_”

“Go to hell!” said Bill. “Get the sandwiches made and a bottle of wine.
You tell him, Jake.”

“And send it up to the next car.” I described where we were.

In our compartment were a man and his wife and their young son.

“I suppose you’re Americans, aren’t you?” the man asked. “Having a good
trip?”

“Wonderful,” said Bill.

“That’s what you want to do. Travel while you’re young. Mother and I
always wanted to get over, but we had to wait a while.”

“You could have come over ten years ago, if you’d wanted to,” the wife
said. “What you always said was: ‘See America first!’ I will say we’ve
seen a good deal, take it one way and another.”

“Say, there’s plenty of Americans on this train,” the husband said.
“They’ve got seven cars of them from Dayton, Ohio. They’ve been on a
pilgrimage to Rome, and now they’re going down to Biarritz and Lourdes.”

“So, that’s what they are. Pilgrims. Goddam Puritans,” Bill said.

“What part of the States you boys from?”

“Kansas City,” I said. “He’s from Chicago.”

“You both going to Biarritz?”

“No. We’re going fishing in Spain.”

“Well, I never cared for it, myself. There’s plenty that do out where I
come from, though. We got some of the best fishing in the State of
Montana. I’ve been out with the boys, but I never cared for it any.”

“Mighty little fishing you did on them trips,” his wife said.

He winked at us.

“You know how the ladies are. If there’s a jug goes along, or a case of
beer, they think it’s hell and damnation.”

“That’s the way men are,” his wife said to us. She smoothed her
comfortable lap. “I voted against prohibition to please him, and because
I like a little beer in the house, and then he talks that way. It’s a
wonder they ever find any one to marry them.”

“Say,” said Bill, “do you know that gang of Pilgrim Fathers have
cornered the dining-car until half past three this afternoon?”

“How do you mean? They can’t do a thing like that.”

“You try and get seats.”

“Well, mother, it looks as though we better go back and get another
breakfast.”

She stood up and straightened her dress.

“Will you boys keep an eye on our things? Come on, Hubert.”

They all three went up to the wagon restaurant. A little while after
they were gone a steward went through announcing the first service, and
pilgrims, with their priests, commenced filing down the corridor. Our
friend and his family did not come back. A waiter passed in the corridor
with our sandwiches and the bottle of Chablis, and we called him in.

“You’re going to work to-day,” I said.

He nodded his head. “They start now, at ten-thirty.”

“When do we eat?”

“Huh! When do I eat?”

He left two glasses for the bottle, and we paid him for the sandwiches
and tipped him.

“I’ll get the plates,” he said, “or bring them with you.”

We ate the sandwiches and drank the Chablis and watched the country out
of the window. The grain was just beginning to ripen and the fields were
full of poppies. The pastureland was green, and there were fine trees,
and sometimes big rivers and chateaux off in the trees.

At Tours we got off and bought another bottle of wine, and when we got
back in the compartment the gentleman from Montana and his wife and his
son, Hubert, were sitting comfortably.

“Is there good swimming in Biarritz?” asked Hubert.

“That boy’s just crazy till he can get in the water,” his mother said.
“It’s pretty hard on youngsters travelling.”

“There’s good swimming,” I said. “But it’s dangerous when it’s rough.”

“Did you get a meal?” Bill asked.

“We sure did. We set right there when they started to come in, and they
must have just thought we were in the party. One of the waiters said
something to us in French, and then they just sent three of them back.”

“They thought we were snappers, all right,” the man said. “It certainly
shows you the power of the Catholic Church. It’s a pity you boys ain’t
Catholics. You could get a meal, then, all right.”

“I am,” I said. “That’s what makes me so sore.”

Finally at a quarter past four we had lunch. Bill had been rather
difficult at the last. He buttonholed a priest who was coming back with
one of the returning streams of pilgrims.

“When do us Protestants get a chance to eat, father?”

“I don’t know anything about it. Haven’t you got tickets?”

“It’s enough to make a man join the Klan,” Bill said. The priest looked
back at him.

Inside the dining-car the waiters served the fifth successive table
d’hôte meal. The waiter who served us was soaked through. His white
jacket was purple under the arms.

“He must drink a lot of wine.”

“Or wear purple undershirts.”

“Let’s ask him.”

“No. He’s too tired.”

The train stopped for half an hour at Bordeaux and we went out through
the station for a little walk. There was not time to get in to the town.
Afterward we passed through the Landes and watched the sun set. There
were wide fire-gaps cut through the pines, and you could look up them
like avenues and see wooded hills way off. About seven-thirty we had
dinner and watched the country through the open window in the diner. It
was all sandy pine country full of heather. There were little clearings
with houses in them, and once in a while we passed a sawmill. It got
dark and we could feel the country hot and sandy and dark outside of the
window, and about nine o’clock we got into Bayonne. The man and his wife
and Hubert all shook hands with us. They were going on to LaNegresse to
change for Biarritz.

“Well, I hope you have lots of luck,” he said.

“Be careful about those bull-fights.”

“Maybe we’ll see you at Biarritz,” Hubert said.

We got off with our bags and rod-cases and passed through the dark
station and out to the lights and the line of cabs and hotel buses.
There, standing with the hotel runners, was Robert Cohn. He did not see
us at first. Then he started forward.

“Hello, Jake. Have a good trip?”

“Fine,” I said. “This is Bill Gorton.”

“How are you?”

“Come on,” said Robert. “I’ve got a cab.” He was a little near-sighted.
I had never noticed it before. He was looking at Bill, trying to make
him out. He was shy, too.

“We’ll go up to my hotel. It’s all right. It’s quite nice.”

We got into the cab, and the cabman put the bags up on the seat beside
him and climbed up and cracked his whip, and we drove over the dark
bridge and into the town.

“I’m awfully glad to meet you,” Robert said to Bill. “I’ve heard so much
about you from Jake and I’ve read your books. Did you get my line,
Jake?”

The cab stopped in front of the hotel and we all got out and went in. It
was a nice hotel, and the people at the desk were very cheerful, and we
each had a good small room.




                                CHAPTER
                                   10


In the morning it was bright, and they were sprinkling the streets of
the town, and we all had breakfast in a café. Bayonne is a nice town. It
is like a very clean Spanish town and it is on a big river. Already, so
early in the morning, it was very hot on the bridge across the river. We
walked out on the bridge and then took a walk through the town.

I was not at all sure Mike’s rods would come from Scotland in time, so
we hunted a tackle store and finally bought a rod for Bill up-stairs
over a drygoods store. The man who sold the tackle was out, and we had
to wait for him to come back. Finally he came in, and we bought a pretty
good rod cheap, and two landing-nets.

We went out into the street again and took a look at the cathedral. Cohn
made some remark about it being a very good example of something or
other, I forget what. It seemed like a nice cathedral, nice and dim,
like Spanish churches. Then we went up past the old fort and out to the
local Syndicat d’Initiative office, where the bus was supposed to start
from. There they told us the bus service did not start until the 1st of
July. We found out at the tourist office what we ought to pay for a
motor-car to Pamplona and hired one at a big garage just around the
corner from the Municipal Theatre for four hundred francs. The car was
to pick us up at the hotel in forty minutes, and we stopped at the café
on the square where we had eaten breakfast, and had a beer. It was hot,
but the town had a cool, fresh, early-morning smell and it was pleasant
sitting in the café. A breeze started to blow, and you could feel that
the air came from the sea. There were pigeons out in the square, and the
houses were a yellow, sun-baked color, and I did not want to leave the
café. But we had to go to the hotel to get our bags packed and pay the
bill. We paid for the beers, we matched and I think Cohn paid, and went
up to the hotel. It was only sixteen francs apiece for Bill and me, with
ten per cent added for the service, and we had the bags sent down and
waited for Robert Cohn. While we were waiting I saw a cockroach on the
parquet floor that must have been at least three inches long. I pointed
him out to Bill and then put my shoe on him. We agreed he must have just
come in from the garden. It was really an awfully clean hotel.

Cohn came down, finally, and we all went out to the car. It was a big,
closed car, with a driver in a white duster with blue collar and cuffs,
and we had him put the back of the car down. He piled in the bags and we
started off up the street and out of the town. We passed some lovely
gardens and had a good look back at the town, and then we were out in
the country, green and rolling, and the road climbing all the time. We
passed lots of Basques with oxen, or cattle, hauling carts along the
road, and nice farmhouses, low roofs, and all white-plastered. In the
Basque country the land all looks very rich and green and the houses and
villages look well-off and clean. Every village had a pelota court and
on some of them kids were playing in the hot sun. There were signs on
the walls of the churches saying it was forbidden to play pelota against
them, and the houses in the villages had red tiled roofs, and then the
road turned off and commenced to climb and we were going way up close
along a hillside, with a valley below and hills stretched off back
toward the sea. You couldn’t see the sea. It was too far away. You could
see only hills and more hills, and you knew where the sea was.

We crossed the Spanish frontier. There was a little stream and a bridge,
and Spanish carabineers, with patent-leather Bonaparte hats, and short
guns on their backs, on one side, and on the other fat Frenchmen in
kepis and mustaches. They only opened one bag and took the passports in
and looked at them. There was a general store and inn on each side of
the line. The chauffeur had to go in and fill out some papers about the
car and we got out and went over to the stream to see if there were any
trout. Bill tried to talk some Spanish to one of the carabineers, but it
did not go very well. Robert Cohn asked, pointing with his finger, if
there were any trout in the stream, and the carabineer said yes, but not
many.

I asked him if he ever fished, and he said no, that he didn’t care for
it.

Just then an old man with long, sunburned hair and beard, and clothes
that looked as though they were made of gunny-sacking, came striding up
to the bridge. He was carrying a long staff, and he had a kid slung on
his back, tied by the four legs, the head hanging down.

The carabineer waved him back with his sword. The man turned without
saying anything, and started back up the white road into Spain.

“What’s the matter with the old one?” I asked.

“He hasn’t got any passport.”

I offered the guard a cigarette. He took it and thanked me.

“What will he do?” I asked.

The guard spat in the dust.

“Oh, he’ll just wade across the stream.”

“Do you have much smuggling?”

“Oh,” he said, “they go through.”

The chauffeur came out, folding up the papers and putting them in the
inside pocket of his coat. We all got in the car and it started up the
white dusty road into Spain. For a while the country was much as it had
been; then, climbing all the time, we crossed the top of a Col, the road
winding back and forth on itself, and then it was really Spain. There
were long brown mountains and a few pines and far-off forests of
beech-trees on some of the mountainsides. The road went along the summit
of the Col and then dropped down, and the driver had to honk, and slow
up, and turn out to avoid running into two donkeys that were sleeping in
the road. We came down out of the mountains and through an oak forest,
and there were white cattle grazing in the forest. Down below there were
grassy plains and clear streams, and then we crossed a stream and went
through a gloomy little village, and started to climb again. We climbed
up and up and crossed another high Col and turned along it, and the road
ran down to the right, and we saw a whole new range of mountains off to
the south, all brown and baked-looking and furrowed in strange shapes.

After a while we came out of the mountains, and there were trees along
both sides of the road, and a stream and ripe fields of grain, and the
road went on, very white and straight ahead, and then lifted to a little
rise, and off on the left was a hill with an old castle, with buildings
close around it and a field of grain going right up to the walls and
shifting in the wind. I was up in front with the driver and I turned
around. Robert Cohn was asleep, but Bill looked and nodded his head.
Then we crossed a wide plain, and there was a big river off on the right
shining in the sun from between the line of trees, and away off you
could see the plateau of Pamplona rising out of the plain, and the walls
of the city, and the great brown cathedral, and the broken skyline of
the other churches. In back of the plateau were the mountains, and every
way you looked there were other mountains, and ahead the road stretched
out white across the plain going toward Pamplona.

We came into the town on the other side of the plateau, the road
slanting up steeply and dustily with shade-trees on both sides, and then
levelling out through the new part of town they are building up outside
the old walls. We passed the bull-ring, high and white and
concrete-looking in the sun, and then came into the big square by a side
street and stopped in front of the Hotel Montoya.

The driver helped us down with the bags. There was a crowd of kids
watching the car, and the square was hot, and the trees were green, and
the flags hung on their staffs, and it was good to get out of the sun
and under the shade of the arcade that runs all the way around the
square. Montoya was glad to see us, and shook hands and gave us good
rooms looking out on the square, and then we washed and cleaned up and
went down-stairs in the dining-room for lunch. The driver stayed for
lunch, too, and afterward we paid him and he started back to Bayonne.

There are two dining-rooms in the Montoya. One is up-stairs on the
second floor and looks out on the square. The other is down one floor
below the level of the square and has a door that opens on the back
street that the bulls pass along when they run through the streets early
in the morning on their way to the ring. It is always cool in the
down-stairs dining-room and we had a very good lunch. The first meal in
Spain was always a shock with the hors d’œuvres, an egg course, two meat
courses, vegetables, salad, and dessert and fruit. You have to drink
plenty of wine to get it all down. Robert Cohn tried to say he did not
want any of the second meat course, but we would not interpret for him,
and so the waitress brought him something else as a replacement, a plate
of cold meats, I think. Cohn had been rather nervous ever since we had
met at Bayonne. He did not know whether we knew Brett had been with him
at San Sebastian, and it made him rather awkward.

“Well,” I said, “Brett and Mike ought to get in to-night.”

“I’m not sure they’ll come,” Cohn said.

“Why not?” Bill said. “Of course they’ll come.”

“They’re always late,” I said.

“I rather think they’re not coming,” Robert Cohn said.

He said it with an air of superior knowledge that irritated both of us.

“I’ll bet you fifty pesetas they’re here to-night,” Bill said. He always
bets when he is angered, and so he usually bets foolishly.

“I’ll take it,” Cohn said. “Good. You remember it, Jake. Fifty pesetas.”

“I’ll remember it myself,” Bill said. I saw he was angry and wanted to
smooth him down.

“It’s a sure thing they’ll come,” I said. “But maybe not to-night.”

“Want to call it off?” Cohn asked.

“No. Why should I? Make it a hundred if you like.”

“All right. I’ll take that.”

“That’s enough,” I said. “Or you’ll have to make a book and give me some
of it.”

“I’m satisfied,” Cohn said. He smiled. “You’ll probably win it back at
bridge, anyway.”

“You haven’t got it yet,” Bill said.

We went out to walk around under the arcade to the Café Iruña for
coffee. Cohn said he was going over and get a shave.

“Say,” Bill said to me, “have I got any chance on that bet?”

“You’ve got a rotten chance. They’ve never been on time anywhere. If
their money doesn’t come it’s a cinch they won’t get in to-night.”

“I was sorry as soon as I opened my mouth. But I had to call him. He’s
all right, I guess, but where does he get this inside stuff? Mike and
Brett fixed it up with us about coming down here.”

I saw Cohn coming over across the square.

“Here he comes.”

“Well, let him not get superior and Jewish.”

“The barber shop’s closed,” Cohn said. “It’s not open till four.”

We had coffee at the Iruña, sitting in comfortable wicker chairs looking
out from the cool of the arcade at the big square. After a while Bill
went to write some letters and Cohn went over to the barber-shop. It was
still closed, so he decided to go up to the hotel and get a bath, and I
sat out in front of the café and then went for a walk in the town. It
was very hot, but I kept on the shady side of the streets and went
through the market and had a good time seeing the town again. I went to
the Ayuntamiento and found the old gentleman who subscribes for the
bull-fight tickets for me every year, and he had gotten the money I sent
him from Paris and renewed my subscriptions, so that was all set. He was
the archivist, and all the archives of the town were in his office. That
has nothing to do with the story. Anyway, his office had a green baize
door and a big wooden door, and when I went out I left him sitting among
the archives that covered all the walls, and I shut both the doors, and
as I went out of the building into the street the porter stopped me to
brush off my coat.

“You must have been in a motor-car,” he said.

The back of the collar and the upper part of the shoulders were gray
with dust.

“From Bayonne.”

“Well, well,” he said. “I knew you were in a motor-car from the way the
dust was.” So I gave him two copper coins.

At the end of the street I saw the cathedral and walked up toward it.
The first time I ever saw it I thought the façade was ugly but I liked
it now. I went inside. It was dim and dark and the pillars went high up,
and there were people praying, and it smelt of incense, and there were
some wonderful big windows. I knelt and started to pray and prayed for
everybody I thought of, Brett and Mike and Bill and Robert Cohn and
myself, and all the bull-fighters, separately for the ones I liked, and
lumping all the rest, then I prayed for myself again, and while I was
praying for myself I found I was getting sleepy, so I prayed that the
bull-fights would be good, and that it would be a fine fiesta, and that
we would get some fishing. I wondered if there was anything else I might
pray for, and I thought I would like to have some money, so I prayed
that I would make a lot of money, and then I started to think how I
would make it, and thinking of making money reminded me of the count,
and I started wondering about where he was, and regretting I hadn’t seen
him since that night in Montmartre, and about something funny Brett told
me about him, and as all the time I was kneeling with my forehead on the
wood in front of me, and was thinking of myself as praying, I was a
little ashamed, and regretted that I was such a rotten Catholic, but
realized there was nothing I could do about it, at least for a while,
and maybe never, but that anyway it was a grand religion, and I only
wished I felt religious and maybe I would the next time; and then I was
out in the hot sun on the steps of the cathedral, and the forefingers
and the thumb of my right hand were still damp, and I felt them dry in
the sun. The sunlight was hot and hard, and I crossed over beside some
buildings, and walked back along side-streets to the hotel.

At dinner that night we found that Robert Cohn had taken a bath, had had
a shave and a haircut and a shampoo, and something put on his hair
afterward to make it stay down. He was nervous, and I did not try to
help him any. The train was due in at nine o’clock from San Sebastian,
and, if Brett and Mike were coming, they would be on it. At twenty
minutes to nine we were not half through dinner. Robert Cohn got up from
the table and said he would go to the station. I said I would go with
him, just to devil him. Bill said he would be damned if he would leave
his dinner. I said we would be right back.

We walked to the station. I was enjoying Cohn’s nervousness. I hoped
Brett would be on the train. At the station the train was late, and we
sat on a baggage-truck and waited outside in the dark. I have never seen
a man in civil life as nervous as Robert Cohn—nor as eager. I was
enjoying it. It was lousy to enjoy it, but I felt lousy. Cohn had a
wonderful quality of bringing out the worst in anybody.

After a while we heard the train-whistle way off below on the other side
of the plateau, and then we saw the headlight coming up the hill. We
went inside the station and stood with a crowd of people just back of
the gates, and the train came in and stopped, and everybody started
coming out through the gates.

They were not in the crowd. We waited till everybody had gone through
and out of the station and gotten into buses, or taken cabs, or were
walking with their friends or relatives through the dark into the town.

“I knew they wouldn’t come,” Robert said. We were going back to the
hotel.

“I thought they might,” I said.

Bill was eating fruit when we came in and finishing a bottle of wine.

“Didn’t come, eh?”

“No.”

“Do you mind if I give you that hundred pesetas in the morning, Cohn?”
Bill asked. “I haven’t changed any money here yet.”

“Oh, forget about it,” Robert Cohn said. “Let’s bet on something else.
Can you bet on bull-fights?”

“You could,” Bill said, “but you don’t need to.”

“It would be like betting on the war,” I said. “You don’t need any
economic interest.”

“I’m very curious to see them,” Robert said.

Montoya came up to our table. He had a telegram in his hand. “It’s for
you.” He handed it to me.

It read: “Stopped night San Sebastian.”

“It’s from them,” I said. I put it in my pocket. Ordinarily I should
have handed it over.

“They’ve stopped over in San Sebastian,” I said. “Send their regards to
you.”

Why I felt that impulse to devil him I do not know. Of course I do know.
I was blind, unforgivingly jealous of what had happened to him. The fact
that I took it as a matter of course did not alter that any. I certainly
did hate him. I do not think I ever really hated him until he had that
little spell of superiority at lunch—that and when he went through all
that barbering. So I put the telegram in my pocket. The telegram came to
me, anyway.

“Well,” I said. “We ought to pull out on the noon bus for Burguete. They
can follow us if they get in to-morrow night.”

There were only two trains up from San Sebastian, an early morning train
and the one we had just met.

“That sounds like a good idea,” Cohn said.

“The sooner we get on the stream the better.”

“It’s all one to me when we start,” Bill said. “The sooner the better.”

We sat in the Iruña for a while and had coffee and then took a little
walk out to the bull-ring and across the field and under the trees at
the edge of the cliff and looked down at the river in the dark, and I
turned in early. Bill and Cohn stayed out in the café quite late, I
believe, because I was asleep when they came in.

In the morning I bought three tickets for the bus to Burguete. It was
scheduled to leave at two o’clock. There was nothing earlier. I was
sitting over at the Iruña reading the papers when I saw Robert Cohn
coming across the square. He came up to the table and sat down in one of
the wicker chairs.

“This is a comfortable café,” he said. “Did you have a good night,
Jake?”

“I slept like a log.”

“I didn’t sleep very well. Bill and I were out late, too.”

“Where were you?”

“Here. And after it shut we went over to that other café. The old man
there speaks German and English.”

“The Café Suizo.”

“That’s it. He seems like a nice old fellow. I think it’s a better café
than this one.”

“It’s not so good in the daytime,” I said. “Too hot. By the way, I got
the bus tickets.”

“I’m not going up to-day. You and Bill go on ahead.”

“I’ve got your ticket.”

“Give it to me. I’ll get the money back.”

“It’s five pesetas.”

Robert Cohn took out a silver five-peseta piece and gave it to me.

“I ought to stay,” he said. “You see I’m afraid there’s some sort of
misunderstanding.”

“Why,” I said. “They may not come here for three or four days now if
they start on parties at San Sebastian.”

“That’s just it,” said Robert. “I’m afraid they expected to meet me at
San Sebastian, and that’s why they stopped over.”

“What makes you think that?”

“Well, I wrote suggesting it to Brett.”

“Why in hell didn’t you stay there and meet them then?” I started to
say, but I stopped. I thought that idea would come to him by itself, but
I do not believe it ever did.

He was being confidential now and it was giving him pleasure to be able
to talk with the understanding that I knew there was something between
him and Brett.

“Well, Bill and I will go up right after lunch,” I said.

“I wish I could go. We’ve been looking forward to this fishing all
winter.” He was being sentimental about it. “But I ought to stay. I
really ought. As soon as they come I’ll bring them right up.”

“Let’s find Bill.”

“I want to go over to the barber-shop.”

“See you at lunch.”

I found Bill up in his room. He was shaving.

“Oh, yes, he told me all about it last night,” Bill said. “He’s a great
little confider. He said he had a date with Brett at San Sebastian.”

“The lying bastard!”

“Oh, no,” said Bill. “Don’t get sore. Don’t get sore at this stage of
the trip. How did you ever happen to know this fellow, anyway?”

“Don’t rub it in.”

Bill looked around, half-shaved, and then went on talking into the
mirror while he lathered his face.

“Didn’t you send him with a letter to me in New York last winter? Thank
God, I’m a travelling man. Haven’t you got some more Jewish friends you
could bring along?” He rubbed his chin with his thumb, looked at it, and
then started scraping again.

“You’ve got some fine ones yourself.”

“Oh, yes. I’ve got some darbs. But not alongside of this Robert Cohn.
The funny thing is he’s nice, too. I like him. But he’s just so awful.”

“He can be damn nice.”

“I know it. That’s the terrible part.”

I laughed.

“Yes. Go on and laugh,” said Bill. “You weren’t out with him last night
until two o’clock.”

“Was he very bad?”

“Awful. What’s all this about him and Brett, anyway? Did she ever have
anything to do with him?”

He raised his chin up and pulled it from side to side.

“Sure. She went down to San Sebastian with him.”

“What a damn-fool thing to do. Why did she do that?”

“She wanted to get out of town and she can’t go anywhere alone. She said
she thought it would be good for him.”

“What bloody-fool things people do. Why didn’t she go off with some of
her own people? Or you?”—he slurred that over—“or me? Why not me?” He
looked at his face carefully in the glass, put a big dab of lather on
each cheek-bone. “It’s an honest face. It’s a face any woman would be
safe with.”

“She’d never seen it.”

“She should have. All women should see it. It’s a face that ought to be
thrown on every screen in the country. Every woman ought to be given a
copy of this face as she leaves the altar. Mothers should tell their
daughters about this face. My son”—he pointed the razor at me—“go west
with this face and grow up with the country.”

He ducked down to the bowl, rinsed his face with cold water, put on some
alcohol, and then looked at himself carefully in the glass, pulling down
his long upper lip.

“My God!” he said, “isn’t it an awful face?”

He looked in the glass.

“And as for this Robert Cohn,” Bill said, “he makes me sick, and he can
go to hell, and I’m damn glad he’s staying here so we won’t have him
fishing with us.”

“You’re damn right.”

“We’re going trout-fishing. We’re going trout-fishing in the Irati
River, and we’re going to get tight now at lunch on the wine of the
country, and then take a swell bus ride.”

“Come on. Let’s go over to the Iruña and start,” I said.




                                CHAPTER
                                   11


It was baking hot in the square when we came out after lunch with our
bags and the rod-case to go to Burguete. People were on top of the bus,
and others were climbing up a ladder. Bill went up and Robert sat beside
Bill to save a place for me, and I went back in the hotel to get a
couple of bottles of wine to take with us. When I came out the bus was
crowded. Men and women were sitting on all the baggage and boxes on top,
and the women all had their fans going in the sun. It certainly was hot.
Robert climbed down and I fitted into the place he had saved on the one
wooden seat that ran across the top.

Robert Cohn stood in the shade of the arcade waiting for us start. A
Basque with a big leather wine-bag in his lap lay across the top of the
bus in front of our seat, leaning back against our legs. He offered the
wine-skin to Bill and to me, and when I tipped it up to drink he
imitated the sound of a klaxon motor-horn so well and so suddenly that I
spilled some of the wine, and everybody laughed. He apologized and made
me take another drink. He made the klaxon again a little later, and it
fooled me the second time. He was very good at it. The Basques liked it.
The man next to Bill was talking to him in Spanish and Bill was not
getting it, so he offered the man one of the bottles of wine. The man
waved it away. He said it was too hot and he had drunk too much at
lunch. When Bill offered the bottle the second time he took a long
drink, and then the bottle went all over that part of the bus. Every one
took a drink very politely, and then they made us cork it up and put it
away. They all wanted us to drink from their leather wine-bottles. They
were peasants going up into the hills.

Finally, after a couple more false klaxons, the bus started, and Robert
Cohn waved good-by to us, and all the Basques waved good-by to him. As
soon as we started out on the road outside of town it was cool. It felt
nice riding high up and close under the trees. The bus went quite fast
and made a good breeze, and as we went out along the road with the dust
powdering the trees and down the hill, we had a fine view, back through
the trees, of the town rising up from the bluff above the river. The
Basque lying against my knees pointed out the view with the neck of the
wine-bottle, and winked at us. He nodded his head.

“Pretty nice, eh?”

“These Basques are swell people,” Bill said.

The Basque lying against my legs was tanned the color of saddle-leather.
He wore a black smock like all the rest. There were wrinkles in his
tanned neck. He turned around and offered his wine-bag to Bill. Bill
handed him one of our bottles. The Basque wagged a forefinger at him and
handed the bottle back, slapping in the cork with the palm of his hand.
He shoved the wine-bag up.

“Arriba! Arriba!” he said. “Lift it up.”

Bill raised the wine-skin and let the stream of wine spurt out and into
his mouth, his head tipped back. When he stopped drinking and tipped the
leather bottle down a few drops ran down his chin.

“No! No!” several Basques said. “Not like that.” One snatched the bottle
away from the owner, who was himself about to give a demonstration. He
was a young fellow and he held the wine-bottle at full arms’ length and
raised it high up, squeezing the leather bag with his hand so the stream
of wine hissed into his mouth. He held the bag out there, the wine
making a flat, hard trajectory into his mouth, and he kept on swallowing
smoothly and regularly.

“Hey!” the owner of the bottle shouted. “Whose wine is that?”

The drinker waggled his little finger at him and smiled at us with his
eyes. Then he bit the stream off sharp, made a quick lift with the
wine-bag and lowered it down to the owner. He winked at us. The owner
shook the wine-skin sadly.

We passed through a town and stopped in front of the posada, and the
driver took on several packages. Then we started on again, and outside
the town the road commenced to mount. We were going through farming
country with rocky hills that sloped down into the fields. The
grain-fields went up the hillsides. Now as we went higher there was a
wind blowing the grain. The road was white and dusty, and the dust rose
under the wheels and hung in the air behind us. The road climbed up into
the hills and left the rich grain-fields below. Now there were only
patches of grain on the bare hillsides and on each side of the
water-courses. We turned sharply out to the side of the road to give
room to pass to a long string of six mules, following one after the
other, hauling a high-hooded wagon loaded with freight. The wagon and
the mules were covered with dust. Close behind was another string of
mules and another wagon. This was loaded with lumber, and the arriero
driving the mules leaned back and put on the thick wooden brakes as we
passed. Up here the country was quite barren and the hills were rocky
and hard-baked clay furrowed by the rain.

We came around a curve into a town, and on both sides opened out a
sudden green valley. A stream went through the centre of the town and
fields of grapes touched the houses.

The bus stopped in front of a posada and many of the passengers got
down, and a lot of the baggage was unstrapped from the roof from under
the big tarpaulins and lifted down. Bill and I got down and went into
the posada. There was a low, dark room with saddles and harness, and
hay-forks made of white wood, and clusters of canvas rope-soled shoes
and hams and slabs of bacon and white garlics and long sausages hanging
from the roof. It was cool and dusky, and we stood in front of a long
wooden counter with two women behind it serving drinks. Behind them were
shelves stacked with supplies and goods.

We each had an aguardiente and paid forty centimes for the two drinks. I
gave the woman fifty centimes to make a tip, and she gave me back the
copper piece, thinking I had misunderstood the price.

Two of our Basques came in and insisted on buying a drink. So they
bought a drink and then we bought a drink, and then they slapped us on
the back and bought another drink. Then we bought, and then we all went
out into the sunlight and the heat, and climbed back on top of the bus.
There was plenty of room now for every one to sit on the seat, and the
Basque who had been lying on the tin roof now sat between us. The woman
who had been serving drinks came out wiping her hands on her apron and
talked to somebody inside the bus. Then the driver came out swinging two
flat leather mail-pouches and climbed up, and everybody waving we
started off.

The road left the green valley at once, and we were up in the hills
again. Bill and the wine-bottle Basque were having a conversation. A man
leaned over from the other side of the seat and asked in English:
“You’re Americans?”

“Sure.”

“I been there,” he said. “Forty years ago.”

He was an old man, as brown as the others, with the stubble of a white
beard.

“How was it?”

“What you say?”

“How was America?”

“Oh, I was in California. It was fine.”

“Why did you leave?”

“What you say?”

“Why did you come back here?”

“Oh! I come back to get married. I was going to go back but my wife she
don’t like to travel. Where you from?”

“Kansas City.”

“I been there,” he said. “I been in Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City,
Denver, Los Angeles, Salt Lake City.”

He named them carefully.

“How long were you over?”

“Fifteen years. Then I come back and got married.”

“Have a drink?”

“All right,” he said. “You can’t get this in America, eh?”

“There’s plenty if you can pay for it.”

“What you come over here for?”

“We’re going to the fiesta at Pamplona.”

“You like the bull-fights?”

“Sure. Don’t you?”

“Yes,” he said. “I guess I like them.”

Then after a little:

“Where you go now?”

“Up to Burguete to fish.”

“Well,” he said, “I hope you catch something.”

He shook hands and turned around to the back seat again. The other
Basques had been impressed. He sat back comfortably and smiled at me
when I turned around to look at the country. But the effort of talking
American seemed to have tired him. He did not say anything after that.

The bus climbed steadily up the road. The country was barren and rocks
stuck up through the clay. There was no grass beside the road. Looking
back we could see the country spread out below. Far back the fields were
squares of green and brown on the hillsides. Making the horizon were the
brown mountains. They were strangely shaped. As we climbed higher the
horizon kept changing. As the bus ground slowly up the road we could see
other mountains coming up in the south. Then the road came over the
crest, flattened out, and went into a forest. It was a forest of cork
oaks, and the sun came through the trees in patches, and there were
cattle grazing back in the trees. We went through the forest and the
road came out and turned along a rise of land, and out ahead of us was a
rolling green plain, with dark mountains beyond it. These were not like
the brown, heat-baked mountains we had left behind. These were wooded
and there were clouds coming down from them. The green plain stretched
off. It was cut by fences and the white of the road showed through the
trunks of a double line of trees that crossed the plain toward the
north. As we came to the edge of the rise we saw the red roofs and white
houses of Burguete ahead strung out on the plain, and away off on the
shoulder of the first dark mountain was the gray metal-sheathed roof of
the monastery of Roncesvalles.

“There’s Roncevaux,” I said.

“Where?”

“Way off there where the mountain starts.”

“It’s cold up here,” Bill said.

“It’s high,” I said. “It must be twelve hundred metres.”

“It’s awful cold,” Bill said.

The bus levelled down onto the straight line of road that ran to
Burguete. We passed a crossroads and crossed a bridge over a stream. The
houses of Burguete were along both sides of the road. There were no
side-streets. We passed the church and the school-yard, and the bus
stopped. We got down and the driver handed down our bags and the
rod-case. A carabineer in his cocked hat and yellow leather cross-straps
came up.

“What’s in there?” he pointed to the rod-case.

I opened it and showed him. He asked to see our fishing permits and I
got them out. He looked at the date and then waved us on.

“Is that all right?” I asked.

“Yes. Of course.”

We went up the street, past the whitewashed stone houses, families
sitting in their doorways watching us, to the inn.

The fat woman who ran the inn came out from the kitchen and shook hands
with us. She took off her spectacles, wiped them, and put them on again.
It was cold in the inn and the wind was starting to blow outside. The
woman sent a girl up-stairs with us to show the room. There were two
beds, a washstand, a clothes-chest, and a big, framed steel-engraving of
Nuestra Señora de Roncesvalles. The wind was blowing against the
shutters. The room was on the north side of the inn. We washed, put on
sweaters, and came down-stairs into the dining-room. It had a stone
floor, low ceiling, and was oak-panelled. The shutters were up and it
was so cold you could see your breath.

“My God!” said Bill. “It can’t be this cold to-morrow. I’m not going to
wade a stream in this weather.”

There was an upright piano in the far corner of the room beyond the
wooden tables and Bill went over and started to play.

“I got to keep warm,” he said.

I went out to find the woman and ask her how much the room and board
was. She put her hands under her apron and looked away from me.

“Twelve pesetas.”

“Why, we only paid that in Pamplona.”

She did not say anything, just took off her glasses and wiped them on
her apron.

“That’s too much,” I said. “We didn’t pay more than that at a big
hotel.”

“We’ve put in a bathroom.”

“Haven’t you got anything cheaper?”

“Not in the summer. Now is the big season.”

We were the only people in the inn. Well, I thought, it’s only a few
days.

“Is the wine included?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Well,” I said. “It’s all right.”

I went back to Bill. He blew his breath at me to show how cold it was,
and went on playing. I sat at one of the tables and looked at the
pictures on the wall. There was one panel of rabbits, dead, one of
pheasants, also dead, and one panel of dead ducks. The panels were all
dark and smoky-looking. There was a cupboard full of liqueur bottles. I
looked at them all. Bill was still playing. “How about a hot rum punch?”
he said. “This isn’t going to keep me warm permanently.”

I went out and told the woman what a rum punch was and how to make it.
In a few minutes a girl brought a stone pitcher, steaming, into the
room. Bill came over from the piano and we drank the hot punch and
listened to the wind.

“There isn’t too much rum in that.”

I went over to the cupboard and brought the rum bottle and poured a
half-tumblerful into the pitcher.

“Direct action,” said Bill. “It beats legislation.”

The girl came in and laid the table for supper.

“It blows like hell up here,” Bill said.

The girl brought in a big bowl of hot vegetable soup and the wine. We
had fried trout afterward and some sort of a stew and a big bowl full of
wild strawberries. We did not lose money on the wine, and the girl was
shy but nice about bringing it. The old woman looked in once and counted
the empty bottles.

After supper we went up-stairs and smoked and read in bed to keep warm.
Once in the night I woke and heard the wind blowing. It felt good to be
warm and in bed.




                                CHAPTER
                                   12


When I woke in the morning I went to the window and looked out. It had
cleared and there were no clouds on the mountains. Outside under the
window were some carts and an old diligence, the wood of the roof
cracked and split by the weather. It must have been left from the days
before the motor-buses. A goat hopped up on one of the carts and then to
the roof of the diligence. He jerked his head at the other goats below
and when I waved at him he bounded down.

Bill was still sleeping, so I dressed, put on my shoes outside in the
hall, and went down-stairs. No one was stirring down-stairs, so I
unbolted the door and went out. It was cool outside in the early morning
and the sun had not yet dried the dew that had come when the wind died
down. I hunted around in the shed behind the inn and found a sort of
mattock, and went down toward the stream to try and dig some worms for
bait. The stream was clear and shallow but it did not look trouty. On
the grassy bank where it was damp I drove the mattock into the earth and
loosened a chunk of sod. There were worms underneath. They slid out of
sight as I lifted the sod and I dug carefully and got a good many.
Digging at the edge of the damp ground I filled two empty tobacco-tins
with worms and sifted dirt onto them. The goats watched me dig.

When I went back into the inn the woman was down in the kitchen, and I
asked her to get coffee for us, and that we wanted a lunch. Bill was
awake and sitting on the edge of the bed.

“I saw you out of the window,” he said. “Didn’t want to interrupt you.
What were you doing? Burying your money?”

“You lazy bum!”

“Been working for the common good? Splendid. I want you to do that every
morning.”

“Come on,” I said. “Get up.”

“What? Get up? I never get up.”

He climbed into bed and pulled the sheet up to his chin.

“Try and argue me into getting up.”

I went on looking for the tackle and putting it all together in the
tackle-bag.

“Aren’t you interested?” Bill asked.

“I’m going down and eat.”

“Eat? Why didn’t you say eat? I thought you just wanted me to get up for
fun. Eat? Fine. Now you’re reasonable. You go out and dig some more
worms and I’ll be right down.”

“Oh, go to hell!”

“Work for the good of all.” Bill stepped into his underclothes. “Show
irony and pity.”

I started out of the room with the tackle-bag, the nets, and the
rod-case.

“Hey! come back!”

I put my head in the door.

“Aren’t you going to show a little irony and pity?”

I thumbed my nose.

“That’s not irony.”

As I went down-stairs I heard Bill singing, “Irony and Pity. When you’re
feeling . . . Oh, Give them Irony and Give them Pity. Oh, give them
Irony. When they’re feeling . . . Just a little irony. Just a little
pity . . .” He kept on singing until he came down-stairs. The tune was:
“The Bells are Ringing for Me and my Gal.” I was reading a week-old
Spanish paper.

“What’s all this irony and pity?”

“What? Don’t you know about Irony and Pity?”

“No. Who got it up?”

“Everybody. They’re mad about it in New York. It’s just like the
Fratellinis used to be.”

The girl came in with the coffee and buttered toast. Or, rather, it was
bread toasted and buttered.

“Ask her if she’s got any jam,” Bill said. “Be ironical with her.”

“Have you got any jam?”

“That’s not ironical. I wish I could talk Spanish.”

The coffee was good and we drank it out of big bowls. The girl brought
in a glass dish of raspberry jam.

“Thank you.”

“Hey! that’s not the way,” Bill said. “Say something ironical. Make some
crack about Primo de Rivera.”

“I could ask her what kind of a jam they think they’ve gotten into in
the Riff.”

“Poor,” said Bill. “Very poor. You can’t do it. That’s all. You don’t
understand irony. You have no pity. Say something pitiful.”

“Robert Cohn.”

“Not so bad. That’s better. Now why is Cohn pitiful? Be ironic.”

He took a big gulp of coffee.

“Aw, hell!” I said. “It’s too early in the morning.”

“There you go. And you claim you want to be a writer, too. You’re only a
newspaper man. An expatriated newspaper man. You ought to be ironical
the minute you get out of bed. You ought to wake up with your mouth full
of pity.”

“Go on,” I said. “Who did you get this stuff from?”

“Everybody. Don’t you read? Don’t you ever see anybody? You know what
you are? You’re an expatriate. Why don’t you live in New York? Then
you’d know these things. What do you want me to do? Come over here and
tell you every year?”

“Take some more coffee,” I said.

“Good. Coffee is good for you. It’s the caffeine in it. Caffeine, we are
here. Caffeine puts a man on her horse and a woman in his grave. You
know what’s the trouble with you? You’re an expatriate. One of the worst
type. Haven’t you heard that? Nobody that ever left their own country
ever wrote anything worth printing. Not even in the newspapers.”

He drank the coffee.

“You’re an expatriate. You’ve lost touch with the soil. You get
precious. Fake European standards have ruined you. You drink yourself to
death. You become obsessed by sex. You spend all your time talking, not
working. You are an expatriate, see? You hang around cafés.”

“It sounds like a swell life,” I said. “When do I work?”

“You don’t work. One group claims women support you. Another group
claims you’re impotent.”

“No,” I said. “I just had an accident.”

“Never mention that,” Bill said. “That’s the sort of thing that can’t be
spoken of. That’s what you ought to work up into a mystery. Like Henry’s
bicycle.”

He had been going splendidly, but he stopped. I was afraid he thought he
had hurt me with that crack about being impotent. I wanted to start him
again.

“It wasn’t a bicycle,” I said. “He was riding horseback.”

“I heard it was a tricycle.”

“Well,” I said. “A plane is sort of like a tricycle. The joystick works
the same way.”

“But you don’t pedal it.”

“No,” I said, “I guess you don’t pedal it.”

“Let’s lay off that,” Bill said.

“All right. I was just standing up for the tricycle.”

“I think he’s a good writer, too,” Bill said. “And you’re a hell of a
good guy. Anybody ever tell you you were a good guy?”

“I’m not a good guy.”

“Listen. You’re a hell of a good guy, and I’m fonder of you than anybody
on earth. I couldn’t tell you that in New York. It’d mean I was a
faggot. That was what the Civil War was about. Abraham Lincoln was a
faggot. He was in love with General Grant. So was Jefferson Davis.
Lincoln just freed the slaves on a bet. The Dred Scott case was framed
by the Anti-Saloon League. Sex explains it all. The Colonel’s Lady and
Judy O’Grady are Lesbians under their skin.”

He stopped.

“Want to hear some more?”

“Shoot,” I said.

“I don’t know any more. Tell you some more at lunch.”

“Old Bill,” I said.

“You bum!”

We packed the lunch and two bottles of wine in the rucksack, and Bill
put it on. I carried the rod-case and the landing-nets slung over my
back. We started up the road and then went across a meadow and found a
path that crossed the fields and went toward the woods on the slope of
the first hill. We walked across the fields on the sandy path. The
fields were rolling and grassy and the grass was short from the sheep
grazing. The cattle were up in the hills. We heard their bells in the
woods.

The path crossed a stream on a foot-log. The log was surfaced off, and
there was a sapling bent across for a rail. In the flat pool beside the
stream tadpoles spotted the sand. We went up a steep bank and across the
rolling fields. Looking back we saw Burguete, white houses and red
roofs, and the white road with a truck going along it and the dust
rising.

Beyond the fields we crossed another faster-flowing stream. A sandy road
led down to the ford and beyond into the woods. The path crossed the
stream on another foot-log below the ford, and joined the road, and we
went into the woods.

It was a beech wood and the trees were very old. Their roots bulked
above the ground and the branches were twisted. We walked on the road
between the thick trunks of the old beeches and the sunlight came
through the leaves in light patches on the grass. The trees were big,
and the foliage was thick but it was not gloomy. There was no
undergrowth, only the smooth grass, very green and fresh, and the big
gray trees well spaced as though it were a park.

“This is country,” Bill said.

The road went up a hill and we got into thick woods, and the road kept
on climbing. Sometimes it dipped down but rose again steeply. All the
time we heard the cattle in the woods. Finally, the road came out on the
top of the hills. We were on the top of the height of land that was the
highest part of the range of wooded hills we had seen from Burguete.
There were wild strawberries growing on the sunny side of the ridge in a
little clearing in the trees.

Ahead the road came out of the forest and went along the shoulder of the
ridge of hills. The hills ahead were not wooded, and there were great
fields of yellow gorse. Way off we saw the steep bluffs, dark with trees
and jutting with gray stone, that marked the course of the Irati River.

“We have to follow this road along the ridge, cross these hills, go
through the woods on the far hills, and come down to the Irati valley,”
I pointed out to Bill.

“That’s a hell of a hike.”

“It’s too far to go and fish and come back the same day, comfortably.”

“Comfortably. That’s a nice word. We’ll have to go like hell to get
there and back and have any fishing at all.”

It was a long walk and the country was very fine, but we were tired when
we came down the steep road that led out of the wooded hills into the
valley of the Rio de la Fabrica.

The road came out from the shadow of the woods into the hot sun. Ahead
was a river-valley. Beyond the river was a steep hill. There was a field
of buckwheat on the hill. We saw a white house under some trees on the
hillside. It was very hot and we stopped under some trees beside a dam
that crossed the river.

Bill put the pack against one of the trees and we jointed up the rods,
put on the reels, tied on leaders, and got ready to fish.

“You’re sure this thing has trout in it?” Bill asked.

“It’s full of them.”

“I’m going to fish a fly. You got any McGintys?”

“There’s some in there.”

“You going to fish bait?”

“Yeah. I’m going to fish the dam here.”

“Well, I’ll take the fly-book, then.” He tied on a fly. “Where’d I
better go? Up or down?”

“Down is the best. They’re plenty up above, too.”

Bill went down the bank.

“Take a worm can.”

“No, I don’t want one. If they won’t take a fly I’ll just flick it
around.”

Bill was down below watching the stream.

“Say,” he called up against the noise of the dam. “How about putting the
wine in that spring up the road?”

“All right,” I shouted. Bill waved his hand and started down the stream.
I found the two wine-bottles in the pack, and carried them up the road
to where the water of a spring flowed out of an iron pipe. There was a
board over the spring and I lifted it and, knocking the corks firmly
into the bottles, lowered them down into the water. It was so cold my
hand and wrist felt numbed. I put back the slab of wood, and hoped
nobody would find the wine.

I got my rod that was leaning against the tree, took the bait-can and
landing-net, and walked out onto the dam. It was built to provide a head
of water for driving logs. The gate was up, and I sat on one of the
squared timbers and watched the smooth apron of water before the river
tumbled into the falls. In the white water at the foot of the dam it was
deep. As I baited up, a trout shot up out of the white water into the
falls and was carried down. Before I could finish baiting, another trout
jumped at the falls, making the same lovely arc and disappearing into
the water that was thundering down. I put on a good-sized sinker and
dropped into the white water close to the edge of the timbers of the
dam.

I did not feel the first trout strike. When I started to pull up I felt
that I had one and brought him, fighting and bending the rod almost
double, out of the boiling water at the foot of the falls, and swung him
up and onto the dam. He was a good trout, and I banged his head against
the timber so that he quivered out straight, and then slipped him into
my bag.

While I had him on, several trout had jumped at the falls. As soon as I
baited up and dropped in again I hooked another and brought him in the
same way. In a little while I had six. They were all about the same
size. I laid them out, side by side, all their heads pointing the same
way, and looked at them. They were beautifully colored and firm and hard
from the cold water. It was a hot day, so I slit them all and shucked
out the insides, gills and all, and tossed them over across the river. I
took the trout ashore, washed them in the cold, smoothly heavy water
above the dam, and then picked some ferns and packed them all in the
bag, three trout on a layer of ferns, then another layer of fems, then
three more trout, and then covered them with ferns. They looked nice in
the ferns, and now the bag was bulky, and I put it in the shade of the
tree.

It was very hot on the dam, so I put my worm-can in the shade with the
bag, and got a book out of the pack and settled down under the tree to
read until Bill should come up for lunch.

It was a little past noon and there was not much shade, but I sat
against the trunk of two of the trees that grew together, and read. The
book was something by A. E. W. Mason, and I was reading a wonderful
story about a man who had been frozen in the Alps and then fallen into a
glacier and disappeared, and his bride was going to wait twenty-four
years exactly for his body to come out on the moraine, while her true
love waited too, and they were still waiting when Bill came up.

“Get any?” he asked. He had his rod and his bag and his net all in one
hand, and he was sweating. I hadn’t heard him come up, because of the
noise from the dam.

“Six. What did you get?”

Bill sat down, opened up his bag, laid a big trout on the grass. He took
out three more, each one a little bigger than the last, and laid them
side by side in the shade from the tree. His face was sweaty and happy.

“How are yours?”

“Smaller.”

“Let’s see them.”

“They’re packed.”

“How big are they really?”

“They’re all about the size of your smallest.”

“You’re not holding out on me?”

“I wish I were.”

“Get them all on worms?”

“Yes.”

“You lazy bum!”

Bill put the trout in the bag and started for the river, swinging the
open bag. He was wet from the waist down and I knew he must have been
wading the stream.

I walked up the road and got out the two bottles of wine. They were
cold. Moisture beaded on the bottles as I walked back to the trees. I
spread the lunch on a newspaper, and uncorked one of the bottles and
leaned the other against a tree. Bill came up drying his hands, his bag
plump with ferns.

“Let’s see that bottle,” he said. He pulled the cork, and tipped up the
bottle and drank. “Whew! That makes my eyes ache.”

“Let’s try it.”

The wine was icy cold and tasted faintly rusty.

“That’s not such filthy wine,” Bill said.

“The cold helps it,” I said.

We unwrapped the little parcels of lunch.

“Chicken.”

“There’s hard-boiled eggs.”

“Find any salt?”

“First the egg,” said Bill. “Then the chicken. Even Bryan could see
that.”

“He’s dead. I read it in the paper yesterday.”

“No. Not really?”

“Yes. Bryan’s dead.”

Bill laid down the egg he was peeling.

“Gentlemen,” he said, and unwrapped a drumstick from a piece of
newspaper. “I reverse the order. For Bryan’s sake. As a tribute to the
Great Commoner. First the chicken; then the egg.”

“Wonder what day God created the chicken?”

“Oh,” said Bill, sucking the drumstick, “how should we know? We should
not question. Our stay on earth is not for long. Let us rejoice and
believe and give thanks.”

“Eat an egg.”

Bill gestured with the drumstick in one hand and the bottle of wine in
the other.

“Let us rejoice in our blessings. Let us utilize the fowls of the air.
Let us utilize the product of the vine. Will you utilize a little,
brother?”

“After you, brother.”

Bill took a long drink.

“Utilize a little, brother,” he handed me the bottle. “Let us not doubt,
brother. Let us not pry into the holy mysteries of the hen-coop with
simian fingers. Let us accept on faith and simply say—I want you to
join with me in saying—What shall we say, brother?” He pointed the
drumstick at me and went on. “Let me tell you. We will say, and I for
one am proud to say—and I want you to say with me, on your knees,
brother. Let no man be ashamed to kneel here in the great out-of-doors.
Remember the woods were God’s first temples. Let us kneel and say:
‘Don’t eat that, Lady—that’s Mencken.’”

“Here,” I said. “Utilize a little of this.”

We uncorked the other bottle.

“What’s the matter?” I said. “Didn’t you like Bryan?”

“I loved Bryan,” said Bill. “We were like brothers.”

“Where did you know him?”

“He and Mencken and I all went to Holy Cross together.”

“And Frankie Fritsch.”

“It’s a lie. Frankie Fritsch went to Fordham.”

“Well,” I said, “I went to Loyola with Bishop Manning.”

“It’s a lie,” Bill said. “I went to Loyola with Bishop Manning myself.”

“You’re cock-eyed,” I said.

“On wine?”

“Why not?”

“It’s the humidity,” Bill said. “They ought to take this damn humidity
away.”

“Have another shot.”

“Is this all we’ve got?”

“Only the two bottles.”

“Do you know what you are?” Bill looked at the bottle affectionately.

“No,” I said.

“You’re in the pay of the Anti-Saloon League.”

“I went to Notre Dame with Wayne B. Wheeler.”

“It’s a lie,” said Bill. “I went to Austin Business College with Wayne
B. Wheeler. He was class president.”

“Well,” I said, “the saloon must go.”

“You’re right there, old classmate,” Bill said. “The saloon must go, and
I will take it with me.”

“You’re cock-eyed.”

“On wine?”

“On wine.”

“Well, maybe I am.”

“Want to take a nap?”

“All right.”

We lay with our heads in the shade and looked up into the trees.

“You asleep?”

“No,” Bill said. “I was thinking.”

I shut my eyes. It felt good lying on the ground.

“Say,” Bill said, “what about this Brett business?”

“What about it?”

“Were you ever in love with her?”

“Sure.”

“For how long?”

“Off and on for a hell of a long time.”

“Oh, hell!” Bill said. “I’m sorry, fella.”

“It’s all right,” I said. “I don’t give a damn any more.”

“Really?”

“Really. Only I’d a hell of a lot rather not talk about it.”

“You aren’t sore I asked you?”

“Why the hell should I be?”

“I’m going to sleep,” Bill said. He put a newspaper over his face.

“Listen, Jake,” he said, “are you really a Catholic?”

“Technically.”

“What does that mean?”

“I don’t know.”

“All right, I’ll go to sleep now,” he said. “Don’t keep me awake by
talking so much.”

I went to sleep, too. When I woke up Bill was packing the rucksack. It
was late in the afternoon and the shadow from the trees was long and
went out over the dam. I was stiff from sleeping on the ground.

“What did you do? Wake up?” Bill asked. “Why didn’t you spend the
night?” I stretched and rubbed my eyes.

“I had a lovely dream,” Bill said. “I don’t remember what it was about,
but it was a lovely dream.”

“I don’t think I dreamt.”

“You ought to dream,” Bill said. “All our biggest business men have been
dreamers. Look at Ford. Look at President Coolidge. Look at Rockefeller.
Look at Jo Davidson.”

I disjointed my rod and Bill’s and packed them in the rod-case. I put
the reels in the tackle-bag. Bill had packed the rucksack and we put one
of the trout-bags in. I carried the other.

“Well,” said Bill, “have we got everything?”

“The worms.”

“Your worms. Put them in there.”

He had the pack on his back and I put the worm-cans in one of the
outside flap pockets.

“You got everything now?”

I looked around on the grass at the foot of the elm-trees.

“Yes.”

We started up the road into the woods. It was a long walk home to
Burguete, and it was dark when we came down across the fields to the
road, and along the road between the houses of the town, their windows
lighted, to the inn.

We stayed five days at Burguete and had good fishing. The nights were
cold and the days were hot, and there was always a breeze even in the
heat of the day. It was hot enough so that it felt good to wade in a
cold stream, and the sun dried you when you came out and sat on the
bank. We found a stream with a pool deep enough to swim in. In the
evenings we played three-handed bridge with an Englishman named Harris,
who had walked over from Saint Jean Pied de Port and was stopping at the
inn for the fishing. He was very pleasant and went with us twice to the
Irati River. There was no word from Robert Cohn nor from Brett and Mike.




                                CHAPTER
                                   13


One morning I went down to breakfast and the Englishman, Harris, was
already at the table. He was reading the paper through spectacles. He
looked up and smiled.

“Good morning,” he said. “Letter for you. I stopped at the post and they
gave it me with mine.”

The letter was at my place at the table, leaning against a coffee-cup.
Harris was reading the paper again. I opened the letter. It had been
forwarded from Pamplona. It was dated San Sebastian, Sunday:

    DEAR JAKE,

    We got here Friday, Brett passed out on the train, so brought
    her here for 3 days rest with old friends of ours. We go to
    Montoya Hotel Pamplona Tuesday, arriving at I don’t know what
    hour. Will you send a note by the bus to tell us what to do to
    rejoin you all on Wednesday. All our love and sorry to be late,
    but Brett was really done in and will be quite all right by
    Tues. and is practically so now. I know her so well and try to
    look after her but it’s not so easy. Love to all the chaps,

                                                          MICHAEL.

“What day of the week is it?” I asked Harris.

“Wednesday, I think. Yes, quite. Wednesday. Wonderful how one loses
track of the days up here in the mountains.”

“Yes. We’ve been here nearly a week.”

“I hope you’re not thinking of leaving?”

“Yes. We’ll go in on the afternoon bus, I’m afraid.”

“What a rotten business. I had hoped we’d all have another go at the
Irati together.”

“We have to go _into_ Pamplona. We’re meeting people there.”

“What rotten luck for me. We’ve had a jolly time here at Burguete.”

“Come on in to Pamplona. We can play some bridge there, and there’s
going to be a damned fine fiesta.”

“I’d like to. Awfully nice of you to ask me. I’d best stop on here,
though. I’ve not much more time to fish.”

“You want those big ones in the Irati.”

“I say, I do, you know. They’re enormous trout there.”

“I’d like to try them once more.”

“Do. Stop over another day. Be a good chap.”

“We really have to get into town,” I said.

“What a pity.”

After breakfast Bill and I were sitting warming in the sun on a bench
out in front of the inn and talking it over. I saw a girl coming up the
road from the centre of the town. She stopped in front of us and took a
telegram out of the leather wallet that hung against her skirt.

“Por ustedes?”

I looked at it. The address was: “Barnes, Burguete.”

“Yes. It’s for us.”

She brought out a book for me to sign, and I gave her a couple of
coppers. The telegram was in Spanish: “Vengo Jueves Cohn.”

I handed it to Bill.

“What does the word Cohn mean?” he asked.

“What a lousy telegram!” I said. “He could send ten words for the same
price. ‘I come Thursday.’ That gives you a lot of dope, doesn’t it?”

“It gives you all the dope that’s of interest to Cohn.”

“We’re going in, anyway,” I said. “There’s no use trying to move Brett
and Mike out here and back before the fiesta. Should we answer it?”

“We might as well,” said Bill. “There’s no need for us to be snooty.”

We walked up to the post-office and asked for a telegraph blank.

“What will we say?” Bill asked.

“‘Arriving to-night.’ That’s enough.”

We paid for the message and walked back to the inn. Harris was there and
the three of us walked up to Roncesvalles. We went through the
monastery.

“It’s a remarkable place,” Harris said, when we came out. “But you know
I’m not much on those sort of places.”

“Me either,” Bill said.

“It’s a remarkable place, though,” Harris said. “I wouldn’t not have
seen it. I’d been intending coming up each day.”

“It isn’t the same as fishing, though, is it?” Bill asked. He liked
Harris.

“I say not.”

We were standing in front of the old chapel of the monastery.

“Isn’t that a pub across the way?” Harris asked. “Or do my eyes deceive
me?”

“It has the look of a pub,” Bill said.

“It looks to me like a pub,” I said.

“I say,” said Harris, “let’s utilize it.” He had taken up utilizing from
Bill.

We had a bottle of wine apiece. Harris would not let us pay. He talked
Spanish quite well, and the innkeeper would not take our money.

“I say. You don’t know what it’s meant to me to have you chaps up here.”

“We’ve had a grand time, Harris.”

Harris was a little tight.

“I say. Really you don’t know how much it means. I’ve not had much fun
since the war.”

“We’ll fish together again, some time. Don’t you forget it, Harris.”

“We must. We _have_ had such a jolly good time.”

“How about another bottle around?”

“Jolly good idea,” said Harris.

“This is mine,” said Bill. “Or we don’t drink it.”

“I wish you’d let me pay for it. It _does_ give me pleasure, you know.”

“This is going to give me pleasure,” Bill said.

The innkeeper brought in the fourth bottle. We had kept the same
glasses. Harris lifted his glass.

“I say. You know this does utilize well.”

Bill slapped him on the back.

“Good old Harris.”

“I say. You know my name isn’t really Harris. It’s Wilson-Harris. All
one name. With a hyphen, you know.”

“Good old Wilson-Harris,” Bill said. “We call you Harris because we’re
so fond of you.”

“I say, Barnes. You don’t know what this all means to me.”

“Come on and utilize another glass,” I said.

“Barnes. Really, Barnes, you can’t know. That’s all.”

“Drink up, Harris.”

We walked back down the road from Roncesvalles with Harris between us.
We had lunch at the inn and Harris went with us to the bus. He gave us
his card, with his address in London and his club and his business
address, and as we got on the bus he handed us each an envelope. I
opened mine and there were a dozen flies in it. Harris had tied them
himself. He tied all his own flies.

“I say, Harris—” I began.

“No, no!” he said. He was climbing down from the bus. “They’re not
first-rate flies at all. I only thought if you fished them some time it
might remind you of what a good time we had.”

The bus started. Harris stood in front of the post-office. He waved. As
we started along the road he turned and walked back toward the inn.

“Say, wasn’t that Harris nice?” Bill said.

“I think he really did have a good time.”

“Harris? You bet he did.”

“I wish he’d come into Pamplona.”

“He wanted to fish.”

“Yes. You couldn’t tell how English would mix with each other, anyway.”

“I suppose not.”

We got into Pamplona late in the afternoon and the bus stopped in front
of the Hotel Montoya. Out in the plaza they were stringing
electric-light wires to light the plaza for the fiesta. A few kids came
up when the bus stopped, and a customs officer for the town made all the
people getting down from the bus open their bundles on the sidewalk. We
went into the hotel and on the stairs I met Montoya. He shook hands with
us, smiling in his embarrassed way.

“Your friends are here,” he said.

“Mr. Campbell?”

“Yes. Mr. Cohn and Mr. Campbell and Lady Ashley.”

He smiled as though there were something I would hear about.

“When did they get in?”

“Yesterday. I’ve saved you the rooms you had.”

“That’s fine. Did you give Mr. Campbell the room on the plaza?”

“Yes. All the rooms we looked at.”

“Where are our friends now?”

“I think they went to the pelota.”

“And how about the bulls?”

Montoya smiled. “To-night,” he said. “To-night at seven o’clock they
bring in the Villar bulls, and to-morrow come the Miuras. Do you all go
down?”

“Oh, yes. They’ve never seen a desencajonada.”

Montoya put his hand on my shoulder.

“I’ll see you there.”

He smiled again. He always smiled as though bull-fighting were a very
special secret between the two of us; a rather shocking but really very
deep secret that we knew about. He always smiled as though there were
something lewd about the secret to outsiders, but that it was something
that we understood. It would not do to expose it to people who would not
understand.

“Your friend, is he aficionado, too?” Montoya smiled at Bill.

“Yes. He came all the way from New York to see the San Fermines.”

“Yes?” Montoya politely disbelieved. “But he’s not aficionado like you.”

He put his hand on my shoulder again embarrassedly.

“Yes,” I said. “He’s a real aficionado.”

“But he’s not aficionado like you are.”

Aficion means passion. An aficionado is one who is passionate about the
bull-fights. All the good bull-fighters stayed at Montoya’s hotel; that
is, those with aficion stayed there. The commercial bull-fighters stayed
once, perhaps, and then did not come back. The good ones came each year.
In Montoya’s room were their photographs. The photographs were dedicated
to Juanito Montoya or to his sister. The photographs of bull-fighters
Montoya had really believed in were framed. Photographs of bull-fighters
who had been without aficion Montoya kept in a drawer of his desk. They
often had the most flattering inscriptions. But they did not mean
anything. One day Montoya took them all out and dropped them in the
waste-basket. He did not want them around.

We often talked about bulls and bull-fighters. I had stopped at the
Montoya for several years. We never talked for very long at a time. It
was simply the pleasure of discovering what we each felt. Men would come
in from distant towns and before they left Pamplona stop and talk for a
few minutes with Montoya about bulls. These men were aficionados. Those
who were aficionados could always get rooms even when the hotel was
full. Montoya introduced me to some of them. They were always very
polite at first, and it amused them very much that I should be an
American. Somehow it was taken for granted that an American could not
have aficion. He might simulate it or confuse it with excitement, but he
could not really have it. When they saw that I had aficion, and there
was no password, no set questions that could bring it out, rather it was
a sort of oral spiritual examination with the questions always a little
on the defensive and never apparent, there was this same embarrassed
putting the hand on the shoulder, or a “Buen hombre.” But nearly always
there was the actual touching. It seemed as though they wanted to touch
you to make it certain.

Montoya could forgive anything of a bull-fighter who had aficion. He
could forgive attacks of nerves, panic, bad unexplainable actions, all
sorts of lapses. For one who had aficion he could forgive anything. At
once he forgave me all my friends. Without his ever saying anything they
were simply a little something shameful between us, like the spilling
open of the horses in bull-fighting.

Bill had gone up-stairs as we came in, and I found him washing and
changing in his room.

“Well,” he said, “talk a lot of Spanish?”

“He was telling me about the bulls coming in to-night.”

“Let’s find the gang and go down.”

“All right. They’ll probably be at the café.”

“Have you got tickets?”

“Yes. I got them for all the unloadings.”

“What’s it like?” He was pulling his cheek before the glass, looking to
see if there were unshaved patches under the line of the jaw.

“It’s pretty good,” I said. “They let the bulls out of the cages one at
a time, and they have steers in the corral to receive them and keep them
from fighting, and the bulls tear in at the steers and the steers run
around like old maids trying to quiet them down.”

“Do they ever gore the steers?”

“Sure. Sometimes they go right after them and kill them.”

“Can’t the steers do anything?”

“No. They’re trying to make friends.”

“What do they have them in for?”

“To quiet down the bulls and keep them from breaking horns against the
stone walls, or goring each other.”

“Must be swell being a steer.”

We went down the stairs and out of the door and walked across the square
toward the Café Iruña. There were two lonely looking ticket-houses
standing in the square. Their windows, marked SOL, SOL Y SOMBRA, and
SOMBRA, were shut. They would not open until the day before the fiesta.

Across the square the white wicker tables and chairs of the Iruña
extended out beyond the Arcade to the edge of the street. I looked for
Brett and Mike at the tables. There they were. Brett and Mike and Robert
Cohn. Brett was wearing a Basque beret. So was Mike. Robert Cohn was
bare-headed and wearing his spectacles. Brett saw us coming and waved.
Her eyes crinkled up as we came up to the table.

“Hello, you chaps!” she called.

Brett was happy. Mike had a way of getting an intensity of feeling into
shaking hands. Robert Cohn shook hands because we were back.

“Where the hell have you been?” I asked.

“I brought them up here,” Cohn said.

“What rot,” Brett said. “We’d have gotten here earlier if you hadn’t
come.”

“You’d never have gotten here.”

“What rot! You chaps are brown. Look at Bill.”

“Did you get good fishing?” Mike asked. “We wanted to join you.”

“It wasn’t bad. We missed you.”

“I wanted to come,” Cohn said, “but I thought I ought to bring them.”

“You bring us. What rot.”

“Was it really good?” Mike asked. “Did you take many?”

“Some days we took a dozen apiece. There was an Englishman up there.”

“Named Harris,” Bill said. “Ever know him, Mike? He was in the war,
too.”

“Fortunate fellow,” Mike said. “What times we had. How I wish those dear
days were back.”

“Don’t be an ass.”

“Were you in the war, Mike?” Cohn asked.

“Was I not.”

“He was a very distinguished soldier,” Brett said. “Tell them about the
time your horse bolted down Piccadilly.”

“I’ll not. I’ve told that four times.”

“You never told me,” Robert Cohn said.

“I’ll not tell that story. It reflects discredit on me.”

“Tell them about your medals.”

“I’ll not. That story reflects great discredit on me.”

“What story’s that?”

“Brett will tell you. She tells all the stories that reflect discredit
on me.”

“Go on. Tell it, Brett.”

“Should I?”

“I’ll tell it myself.”

“What medals have you got, Mike?”

“I haven’t got any medals.”

“You must have some.”

“I suppose I’ve the usual medals. But I never sent in for them. One time
there was this wopping big dinner and the Prince of Wales was to be
there, and the cards said medals will be worn. So naturally I had no
medals, and I stopped at my tailor’s and he was impressed by the
invitation, and I thought that’s a good piece of business, and I said to
him: ‘You’ve got to fix me up with some medals.’ He said: ‘What medals,
sir?’ And I said: ‘Oh, any medals. Just give me a few medals.’ So he
said: ‘What medals _have_ you, sir?’ And I said: ‘How should I know?’
Did he think I spent all my time reading the bloody gazette? ‘Just give
me a good lot. Pick them out yourself.’ So he got me some medals, you
know, miniature medals, and handed me the box, and I put it in my pocket
and forgot it. Well, I went to the dinner, and it was the night they’d
shot Henry Wilson, so the Prince didn’t come and the King didn’t come,
and no one wore any medals, and all these coves were busy taking off
their medals, and I had mine in my pocket.”

He stopped for us to laugh.

“Is that all?”

“That’s all. Perhaps I didn’t tell it right.”

“You didn’t,” said Brett. “But no matter.”

We were all laughing.

“Ah, yes,” said Mike. “I know now. It was a damn dull dinner, and I
couldn’t stick it, so I left. Later on in the evening I found the box in
my pocket. What’s this? I said. Medals? Bloody military medals? So I cut
them all off their backing—you know, they put them on a strip—and gave
them all around. Gave one to each girl. Form of souvenir. They thought I
was hell’s own shakes of a soldier. Give away medals in a night club.
Dashing fellow.”

“Tell the rest,” Brett said.

“Don’t you think that was funny?” Mike asked. We were all laughing. “It
was. I swear it was. Any rate, my tailor wrote me and wanted the medals
back. Sent a man around. Kept on writing for months. Seems some chap had
left them to be cleaned. Frightfully military cove. Set hell’s own store
by them.” Mike paused. “Rotten luck for the tailor,” he said.

“You don’t mean it,” Bill said. “I should think it would have been grand
for the tailor.”

“Frightfully good tailor. Never believe it to see me now,” Mike said. “I
used to pay him a hundred pounds a year just to keep him quiet. So he
wouldn’t send me any bills. Frightful blow to him when I went bankrupt.
It was right after the medals. Gave his letters rather a bitter tone.”

“How did you go bankrupt?” Bill asked.

“Two ways,” Mike said. “Gradually and then suddenly.”

“What brought it on?”

“Friends,” said Mike. “I had a lot of friends. False friends. Then I had
creditors, too. Probably had more creditors than anybody in England.”

“Tell them about in the court,” Brett said.

“I don’t remember,” Mike said. “I was just a little tight.”

“Tight!” Brett exclaimed. “You were blind!”

“Extraordinary thing,” Mike said. “Met my former partner the other day.
Offered to buy me a drink.”

“Tell them about your learned counsel,” Brett said.

“I will not,” Mike said. “My learned counsel was blind, too. I say this
is a gloomy subject. Are we going down and see these bulls unloaded or
not?”

“Let’s go down.”

We called the waiter, paid, and started to walk through the town. I
started off walking with Brett, but Robert Cohn came up and joined her
on the other side. The three of us walked along, past the Ayuntamiento
with the banners hung from the balcony, down past the market and down
past the steep street that led to the bridge across the Arga. There were
many people walking to go and see the bulls, and carriages drove down
the hill and across the bridge, the drivers, the horses, and the whips
rising above the walking people in the street. Across the bridge we
turned up a road to the corrals. We passed a wine-shop with a sign in
the window: Good Wine 30 Centimes A Liter.

“That’s where we’ll go when funds get low,” Brett said.

The woman standing in the door of the wine-shop looked at us as we
passed. She called to some one in the house and three girls came to the
window and stared. They were staring at Brett.

At the gate of the corrals two men took tickets from the people that
went in. We went in through the gate. There were trees inside and a low,
stone house. At the far end was the stone wall of the corrals, with
apertures in the stone that were like loopholes running all along the
face of each corral. A ladder led up to the top of the wall, and people
were climbing up the ladder and spreading down to stand on the walls
that separated the two corrals. As we came up the ladder, walking across
the grass under the trees, we passed the big, gray painted cages with
the bulls in them. There was one bull in each travelling-box. They had
come by train from a bull-breeding ranch in Castile, and had been
unloaded off flat-cars at the station and brought up here to be let out
of their cages into the corrals. Each cage was stencilled with the name
and the brand of the bull-breeder.

We climbed up and found a place on the wall looking down into the
corral. The stone walls were whitewashed, and there was straw on the
ground and wooden feed-boxes and water-troughs set against the wall.

“Look up there,” I said.

Beyond the river rose the plateau of the town. All along the old walls
and ramparts people were standing. The three lines of fortifications
made three black lines of people. Above the walls there were heads in
the windows of the houses. At the far end of the plateau boys had
climbed into the trees.

“They must think something is going to happen,” Brett said.

“They want to see the bulls.”

Mike and Bill were on the other wall across the pit of the corral. They
waved to us. People who had come late were standing behind us, pressing
against us when other people crowded them.

“Why don’t they start?” Robert Cohn asked.

A single mule was hitched to one of the cages and dragged it up against
the gate in the corral wall. The men shoved and lifted it with crowbars
into position against the gate. Men were standing on the wall ready to
pull up the gate of the corral and then the gate of the cage. At the
other end of the corral a gate opened and two steers came in, swaying
their heads and trotting, their lean flanks swinging. They stood
together at the far end, their heads toward the gate where the bull
would enter.

“They don’t look happy,” Brett said.

The men on top of the wall leaned back and pulled up the door of the
corral. Then they pulled up the door of the cage.

I leaned way over the wall and tried to see into the cage. It was dark.
Some one rapped on the cage with an iron bar. Inside something seemed to
explode. The bull, striking into the wood from side to side with his
horns, made a great noise. Then I saw a dark muzzle and the shadow of
horns, and then, with a clattering on the wood in the hollow box, the
bull charged and came out into the corral, skidding with his forefeet in
the straw as he stopped, his head up, the great hump of muscle on his
neck swollen tight, his body muscles quivering as he looked up at the
crowd on the stone walls. The two steers backed away against the wall,
their heads sunken, their eyes watching the bull.

The bull saw them and charged. A man shouted from behind one of the
boxes and slapped his hat against the planks, and the bull, before he
reached the steer, turned, gathered himself and charged where the man
had been, trying to reach him behind the planks with a half-dozen quick,
searching drives with the right horn.

“My God, isn’t he beautiful?” Brett said. We were looking right down on
him.

“Look how he knows how to use his horns,” I said. “He’s got a left and a
right just like a boxer.”

“Not really?”

“You watch.”

“It goes too fast.”

“Wait. There’ll be another one in a minute.”

They had backed up another cage into the entrance. In the far corner a
man, from behind one of the plank shelters, attracted the bull, and
while the bull was facing away the gate was pulled up and a second bull
came out into the corral.

He charged straight for the steers and two men ran out from behind the
planks and shouted, to turn him. He did not change his direction and the
men shouted: “Hah! Hah! Toro!” and waved their arms; the two steers
turned sideways to take the shock, and the bull drove into one of the
steers.

“Don’t look,” I said to Brett. She was watching, fascinated.

“Fine,” I said. “If it doesn’t buck you.”

“I saw it,” she said. “I saw him shift from his left to his right horn.”

“Damn good!”

The steer was down now, his neck stretched out, his head twisted, he lay
the way he had fallen. Suddenly the bull left off and made for the other
steer which had been standing at the far end, his head swinging,
watching it all. The steer ran awkwardly and the bull caught him, hooked
him lightly in the flank, and then turned away and looked up at the
crowd on the walls, his crest of muscle rising. The steer came up to him
and made as though to nose at him and the bull hooked perfunctorily. The
next time he nosed at the steer and then the two of them trotted over to
the other bull.

When the next bull came out, all three, the two bulls and the steer,
stood together, their heads side by side, their horns against the
newcomer. In a few minutes the steer picked the new bull up, quieted him
down, and made him one of the herd. When the last two bulls had been
unloaded the herd were all together.

The steer who had been gored had gotten to his feet and stood against
the stone wall. None of the bulls came near him, and he did not attempt
to join the herd.

We climbed down from the wall with the crowd, and had a last look at the
bulls through the loopholes in the wall of the corral. They were all
quiet now, their heads down. We got a carriage outside and rode up to
the café. Mike and Bill came in half an hour later. They had stopped on
the way for several drinks.

We were sitting in the café.

“That’s an extraordinary business,” Brett said.

“Will those last ones fight as well as the first?” Robert Cohn asked.
“They seemed to quiet down awfully fast.”

“They all know each other,” I said. “They’re only dangerous when they’re
alone, or only two or three of them together.”

“What do you mean, dangerous?” Bill said. “They all looked dangerous to
me.”

“They only want to kill when they’re alone. Of course, if you went in
there you’d probably detach one of them from the herd, and he’d be
dangerous.”

“That’s too complicated,” Bill said. “Don’t you ever detach me from the
herd, Mike.”

“I say,” Mike said, “they _were_ fine bulls, weren’t they? Did you see
their horns?”

“Did I not,” said Brett. “I had no idea what they were like.”

“Did you see the one hit that steer?” Mike asked. “That was
extraordinary.”

“It’s no life being a steer,” Robert Cohn said.

“Don’t you think so?” Mike said. “I would have thought you’d loved being
a steer, Robert.”

“What do you mean, Mike?”

“They lead such a quiet life. They never say anything and they’re always
hanging about so.”

We were embarrassed. Bill laughed. Robert Cohn was angry. Mike went on
talking.

“I should think you’d love it. You’d never have to say a word. Come on,
Robert. Do say something. Don’t just sit there.”

“I said something, Mike. Don’t you remember? About the steers.”

“Oh, say something more. Say something funny. Can’t you see we’re all
having a good time here?”

“Come off it, Michael. You’re drunk,” Brett said.

“I’m not drunk. I’m quite serious. _Is_ Robert Cohn going to follow
Brett around like a steer all the time?”

“Shut up, Michael. Try and show a little breeding.”

“Breeding be damned. Who has any breeding, anyway, except the bulls?
Aren’t the bulls lovely? Don’t you like them, Bill? Why don’t you say
something, Robert? Don’t sit there looking like a bloody funeral. What
if Brett did sleep with you? She’s slept with lots of better people than
you.”

“Shut up,” Cohn said. He stood up. “Shut up, Mike.”

“Oh, don’t stand up and act as though you were going to hit me. That
won’t make any difference to me. Tell me, Robert. Why do you follow
Brett around like a poor bloody steer? Don’t you know you’re not wanted?
I know when I’m not wanted. Why don’t you know when you’re not wanted?
You came down to San Sebastian where you weren’t wanted, and followed
Brett around like a bloody steer. Do you think that’s right?”

“Shut up. You’re drunk.”

“Perhaps I am drunk. Why aren’t you drunk? Why don’t you ever get drunk,
Robert? You know you didn’t have a good time at San Sebastian because
none of our friends would invite you on any of the parties. You can’t
blame them hardly. Can you? I asked them to. They wouldn’t do it. You
can’t blame them, now. Can you? Now, answer me. Can you blame them?”

“Go to hell, Mike.”

“I can’t blame them. Can you blame them? Why do you follow Brett around?
Haven’t you any manners? How do you think it makes _me_ feel?”

“You’re a splendid one to talk about manners,” Brett said. “You’ve such
lovely manners.”

“Come on, Robert,” Bill said.

“What do you follow her around for?”

Bill stood up and took hold of Cohn.

“Don’t go,” Mike said. “Robert Cohn’s going to buy a drink.”

Bill went off with Cohn. Cohn’s face was sallow. Mike went on talking. I
sat and listened for a while. Brett looked disgusted.

“I say, Michael, you might not be such a bloody ass,” she interrupted.
“I’m not saying he’s not right, you know.” She turned to me.

The emotion left Mike’s voice. We were all friends together.

“I’m not so damn drunk as I sounded,” he said.

“I know you’re not,” Brett said.

“We’re none of us sober,” I said.

“I didn’t say anything I didn’t mean.”

“But you put it so badly,” Brett laughed.

“He was an ass, though. He came down to San Sebastian where he damn well
wasn’t wanted. He hung around Brett and just _looked_ at her. It made me
damned well sick.”

“He did behave very badly,” Brett said.

“Mark you. Brett’s had affairs with men before. She tells me all about
everything. She gave me this chap Cohn’s letters to read. I wouldn’t
read them.”

“Damned noble of you.”

“No, listen, Jake. Brett’s gone off with men. But they weren’t ever
Jews, and they didn’t come and hang about afterward.”

“Damned good chaps,” Brett said. “It’s all rot to talk about it. Michael
and I understand each other.”

“She gave me Robert Cohn’s letters. I wouldn’t read them.”

“You wouldn’t read any letters, darling. You wouldn’t read mine.”

“I can’t read letters,” Mike said. “Funny, isn’t it?”

“You can’t read anything.”

“No. You’re wrong there. I read quite a bit. I read when I’m at home.”

“You’ll be writing next,” Brett said. “Come on, Michael. Do buck up.
You’ve got to go through with this thing now. He’s here. Don’t spoil the
fiesta.”

“Well, let him behave, then.”

“He’ll behave. I’ll tell him.”

“You tell him, Jake. Tell him either he must behave or get out.”

“Yes,” I said, “it would be nice for me to tell him.”

“Look, Brett. Tell Jake what Robert calls you. That is perfect, you
know.”

“Oh, no. I can’t.”

“Go on. We’re all friends. Aren’t we all friends, Jake?”

“I can’t tell him. It’s too ridiculous.”

“I’ll tell him.”

“You won’t, Michael. Don’t be an ass.”

“He calls her Circe,” Mike said. “He claims she turns men into swine.
Damn good. I wish I were one of these literary chaps.”

“He’d be good, you know,” Brett said. “He writes a good letter.”

“I know,” I said. “He wrote me from San Sebastian.”

“That was nothing,” Brett said. “He can write a damned amusing letter.”

“She made me write that. She was supposed to be ill.”

“I damned well was, too.”

“Come on,” I said, “we must go in and eat.”

“How should I meet Cohn?” Mike said.

“Just act as though nothing had happened.”

“It’s quite all right with me,” Mike said. “I’m not embarrassed.”

“If he says anything, just say you were tight.”

“Quite. And the funny thing is I think I was tight.”

“Come on,” Brett said. “Are these poisonous things paid for? I must
bathe before dinner.”

We walked across the square. It was dark and all around the square were
the lights from the cafés under the arcades. We walked across the gravel
under the trees to the hotel.

They went up-stairs and I stopped to speak with Montoya.

“Well, how did you like the bulls?” he asked.

“Good. They were nice bulls.”

“They’re all right”—Montoya shook his head—“but they’re not too good.”

“What didn’t you like about them?”

“I don’t know. They just didn’t give me the feeling that they were so
good.”

“I know what you mean.”

“They’re all right.”

“Yes. They’re all right.”

“How did your friends like them?”

“Fine.”

“Good,” Montoya said.

I went up-stairs. Bill was in his room standing on the balcony looking
out at the square. I stood beside him.

“Where’s Cohn?”

“Up-stairs in his room.”

“How does he feel?”

“Like hell, naturally. Mike was awful. He’s terrible when he’s tight.”

“He wasn’t so tight.”

“The hell he wasn’t. I know what we had before we came to the café.”

“He sobered up afterward.”

“Good. He was terrible. I don’t like Cohn, God knows, and I think it was
a silly trick for him to go down to San Sebastian, but nobody has any
business to talk like Mike.”

“How’d you like the bulls?”

“Grand. It’s grand the way they bring them out.”

“To-morrow come the Miuras.”

“When does the fiesta start?”

“Day after to-morrow.”

“We’ve got to keep Mike from getting so tight. That kind of stuff is
terrible.”

“We’d better get cleaned up for supper.”

“Yes. That will be a pleasant meal.”

“Won’t it?”

As a matter of fact, supper was a pleasant meal. Brett wore a black,
sleeveless evening dress. She looked quite beautiful. Mike acted as
though nothing had happened. I had to go up and bring Robert Cohn down.
He was reserved and formal, and his face was still taut and sallow, but
he cheered up finally. He could not stop looking at Brett. It seemed to
make him happy. It must have been pleasant for him to see her looking so
lovely, and know he had been away with her and that every one knew it.
They could not take that away from him. Bill was very funny. So was
Michael. They were good together.

It was like certain dinners I remember from the war. There was much
wine, an ignored tension, and a feeling of things coming that you could
not prevent happening. Under the wine I lost the disgusted feeling and
was happy. It seemed they were all such nice people.




                                CHAPTER
                                   14


I do not know what time I got to bed. I remember undressing, putting on
a bathrobe, and standing out on the balcony. I knew I was quite drunk,
and when I came in I put on the light over the head of the bed and
started to read. I was reading a book by Turgenieff. Probably I read the
same two pages over several times. It was one of the stories in “A
Sportsman’s Sketches.” I had read it before, but it seemed quite new.
The country became very clear and the feeling of pressure in my head
seemed to loosen. I was very drunk and I did not want to shut my eyes
because the room would go round and round. If I kept on reading that
feeling would pass.

I heard Brett and Robert Cohn come up the stairs. Cohn said good night
outside the door and went on up to his room. I heard Brett go into the
room next door. Mike was already in bed. He had come in with me an hour
before. He woke as she came in, and they talked together. I heard them
laugh. I turned off the light and tried to go to sleep. It was not
necessary to read any more. I could shut my eyes without getting the
wheeling sensation. But I could not sleep. There is no reason why
because it is dark you should look at things differently from when it is
light. The hell there isn’t!

I figured that all out once, and for six months I never slept with the
electric light off. That was another bright idea. To hell with women,
anyway. To hell with you, Brett Ashley.

Women made such swell friends. Awfully swell. In the first place, you
had to be in love with a woman to have a basis of friendship. I had been
having Brett for a friend. I had not been thinking about her side of it.
I had been getting something for nothing. That only delayed the
presentation of the bill. The bill always came. That was one of the
swell things you could count on.

I thought I had paid for everything. Not like the woman pays and pays
and pays. No idea of retribution or punishment. Just exchange of values.
You gave up something and got something else. Or you worked for
something. You paid some way for everything that was any good. I paid my
way into enough things that I liked, so that I had a good time. Either
you paid by learning about them, or by experience, or by taking chances,
or by money. Enjoying living was learning to get your money’s worth and
knowing when you had it. You could get your money’s worth. The world was
a good place to buy in. It seemed like a fine philosophy. In five years,
I thought, it will seem just as silly as all the other fine philosophies
I’ve had.

Perhaps that wasn’t true, though. Perhaps as you went along you did
learn something. I did not care what it was all about. All I wanted to
know was how to live in it. Maybe if you found out how to live in it you
learned from that what it was all about.

I wished Mike would not behave so terribly to Cohn, though. Mike was a
bad drunk. Brett was a good drunk. Bill was a good drunk. Cohn was never
drunk. Mike was unpleasant after he passed a certain point. I liked to
see him hurt Cohn. I wished he would not do it, though, because
afterward it made me disgusted at myself. That was morality; things that
made you disgusted afterward. No, that must be immorality. That was a
large statement. What a lot of bilge I could think up at night. What
rot, I could hear Brett say it. What rot! When you were with English you
got into the habit of using English expressions in your thinking. The
English spoken language—the upper classes, anyway—must have fewer
words than the Eskimo. Of course I didn’t know anything about the
Eskimo. Maybe the Eskimo was a fine language. Say the Cherokee. I didn’t
know anything about the Cherokee, either. The English talked with
inflected phrases. One phrase to mean everything. I liked them, though.
I liked the way they talked. Take Harris. Still Harris was not the upper
classes.

I turned on the light again and read. I read the Turgenieff. I knew that
now, reading it in the oversensitized state of my mind after much too
much brandy, I would remember it somewhere, and afterward it would seem
as though it had really happened to me. I would always have it. That was
another good thing you paid for and then had. Some time along toward
daylight I went to sleep.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The next two days in Pamplona were quiet, and there were no more rows.
The town was getting ready for the fiesta. Workmen put up the gate-posts
that were to shut off the side streets when the bulls were released from
the corrals and came running through the streets in the morning on their
way to the ring. The workmen dug holes and fitted in the timbers, each
timber numbered for its regular place. Out on the plateau beyond the
town employees of the bull-ring exercised picador horses, galloping them
stiff-legged on the hard, sun-baked fields behind the bull-ring. The big
gate of the bull-ring was open, and inside the amphitheatre was being
swept. The ring was rolled and sprinkled, and carpenters replaced
weakened or cracked planks in the barrera. Standing at the edge of the
smooth rolled sand you could look up in the empty stands and see old
women sweeping out the boxes.

Outside, the fence that led from the last street of the town to the
entrance of the bull-ring was already in place and made a long pen; the
crowd would come running down with the bulls behind them on the morning
of the day of the first bull-fight. Out across the plain, where the
horse and cattle fair would be, some gypsies had camped under the trees.
The wine and aguardiente sellers were putting up their booths. One booth
advertised =ANIS DEL TORO=. The cloth sign hung against the
planks in the hot sun. In the big square that was the centre of the town
there was no change yet. We sat in the white wicker chairs on the
terrasse of the café and watched the motor-buses come in and unload
peasants from the country coming in to the market, and we watched the
buses fill up and start out with peasants sitting with their saddle-bags
full of the things they had bought in the town. The tall gray
motor-buses were the only life of the square except for the pigeons and
the man with a hose who sprinkled the gravelled square and watered the
streets.

In the evening was the paseo. For an hour after dinner every one, all
the good-looking girls, the officers from the garrison, all the
fashionable people of the town, walked in the street on one side of the
square while the café tables filled with the regular after-dinner crowd.

During the morning I usually sat in the café and read the Madrid papers
and then walked in the town or out into the country. Sometimes Bill went
along. Sometimes he wrote in his room. Robert Cohn spent the mornings
studying Spanish or trying to get a shave at the barber-shop. Brett and
Mike never got up until noon. We all had a vermouth at the café. It was
a quiet life and no one was drunk. I went to church a couple of times,
once with Brett. She said she wanted to hear me go to confession, but I
told her that not only was it impossible but it was not as interesting
as it sounded, and, besides, it would be in a language she did not know.
We met Cohn as we came out of church, and although it was obvious he had
followed us, yet he was very pleasant and nice, and we all three went
for a walk out to the gypsy camp, and Brett had her fortune told.

It was a good morning, there were high white clouds above the mountains.
It had rained a little in the night and it was fresh and cool on the
plateau, and there was a wonderful view. We all felt good and we felt
healthy, and I felt quite friendly to Cohn. You could not be upset about
anything on a day like that.

That was the last day before the fiesta.




                                CHAPTER
                                   15


At noon of Sunday, the 6th of July, the fiesta exploded. There is no
other way to describe it. People had been coming in all day from the
country, but they were assimilated in the town and you did not notice
them. The square was as quiet in the hot sun as on any other day. The
peasants were in the outlying wine-shops. There they were drinking,
getting ready for the fiesta. They had come in so recently from the
plains and the hills that it was necessary that they make their shifting
in values gradually. They could not start in paying café prices. They
got their money’s worth in the wine-shops. Money still had a definite
value in hours worked and bushels of grain sold. Late in the fiesta it
would not matter what they paid, nor where they bought.

Now on the day of the starting of the fiesta of San Fermin they had been
in the wine-shops of the narrow streets of the town since early morning.
Going down the streets in the morning on the way to mass in the
cathedral, I heard them singing through the open doors of the shops.
They were warming up. There were many people at the eleven o’clock mass.
San Fermin is also a religious festival.

I walked down the hill from the cathedral and up the street to the café
on the square. It was a little before noon. Robert Cohn and Bill were
sitting at one of the tables. The marble-topped tables and the white
wicker chairs were gone. They were replaced by cast-iron tables and
severe folding chairs. The café was like a battleship stripped for
action. To-day the waiters did not leave you alone all morning to read
without asking if you wanted to order something. A waiter came up as
soon as I sat down.

“What are you drinking?” I asked Bill and Robert.

“Sherry,” Cohn said.

“Jerez,” I said to the waiter.

Before the waiter brought the sherry the rocket that announced the
fiesta went up in the square. It burst and there was a gray ball of
smoke high up above the Theatre Gayarre, across on the other side of the
plaza. The ball of smoke hung in the sky like a shrapnel burst, and as I
watched, another rocket came up to it, trickling smoke in the bright
sunlight. I saw the bright flash as it burst and another little cloud of
smoke appeared. By the time the second rocket had burst there were so
many people in the arcade, that had been empty a minute before, that the
waiter, holding the bottle high up over his head, could hardly get
through the crowd to our table. People were coming into the square from
all sides, and down the street we heard the pipes and the fifes and the
drums coming. They were playing the _riau-riau_ music, the pipes shrill
and the drums pounding, and behind them came the men and boys dancing.
When the fifers stopped they all crouched down in the street, and when
the reed-pipes and the fifes shrilled, and the flat, dry, hollow drums
tapped it out again, they all went up in the air dancing. In the crowd
you saw only the heads and shoulders of the dancers going up and down.

In the square a man, bent over, was playing on a reed-pipe, and a crowd
of children were following him shouting, and pulling at his clothes. He
came out of the square, the children following him, and piped them past
the café and down a side street. We saw his blank pockmarked face as he
went by, piping, the children close behind him shouting and pulling at
him.

“He must be the village idiot,” Bill said. “My God! look at that!”

Down the street came dancers. The street was solid with dancers, all
men. They were all dancing in time behind their own fifers and drummers.
They were a club of some sort, and all wore workmen’s blue smocks, and
red handkerchiefs around their necks, and carried a great banner on two
poles. The banner danced up and down with them as they came down
surrounded by the crowd.

“Hurray for Wine! Hurray for the Foreigners!” was painted on the banner.

“Where are the foreigners?” Robert Cohn asked.

“We’re the foreigners,” Bill said.

All the time rockets were going up. The café tables were all full now.
The square was emptying of people and the crowd was filling the cafés.

“Where’s Brett and Mike?” Bill asked.

“I’ll go and get them,” Cohn said.

“Bring them here.”

The fiesta was really started. It kept up day and night for seven days.
The dancing kept up, the drinking kept up, the noise went on. The things
that happened could only have happened during a fiesta. Everything
became quite unreal finally and it seemed as though nothing could have
any consequences. It seemed out of place to think of consequences during
the fiesta. All during the fiesta you had the feeling, even when it was
quiet, that you had to shout any remark to make it heard. It was the
same feeling about any action. It was a fiesta and it went on for seven
days.

That afternoon was the big religious procession. San Fermin was
translated from one church to another. In the procession were all the
dignitaries, civil and religious. We could not see them because the
crowd was too great. Ahead of the formal procession and behind it danced
the _riau-riau_ dancers. There was one mass of yellow shirts dancing up
and down in the crowd. All we could see of the procession through the
closely pressed people that crowded all the side streets and curbs were
the great giants, cigar-store Indians, thirty feet high, Moors, a King
and Queen, whirling and waltzing solemnly to the _riau-riau_.

They were all standing outside the chapel where San Fermin and the
dignitaries had passed in, leaving a guard of soldiers, the giants, with
the men who danced in them standing beside their resting frames, and the
dwarfs moving with their whacking bladders through the crowd. We started
inside and there was a smell of incense and people filing back into the
church, but Brett was stopped just inside the door because she had no
hat, so we went out again and along the street that ran back from the
chapel into town. The street was lined on both sides with people keeping
their place at the curb for the return of the procession. Some dancers
formed a circle around Brett and started to dance. They wore big wreaths
of white garlics around their necks. They took Bill and me by the arms
and put us in the circle. Bill started to dance, too. They were all
chanting. Brett wanted to dance but they did not want her to. They
wanted her as an image to dance around. When the song ended with the
sharp _riau-riau!_ they rushed us into a wine-shop.

We stood at the counter. They had Brett seated on a wine-cask. It was
dark in the wine-shop and full of men singing, hard-voiced singing. Back
of the counter they drew the wine from casks. I put down money for the
wine, but one of the men picked it up and put it back in my pocket.

“I want a leather wine-bottle,” Bill said.

“There’s a place down the street,” I said. “I’ll go get a couple.”

The dancers did not want me to go out. Three of them were sitting on the
high wine-cask beside Brett, teaching her to drink out of the
wine-skins. They had hung a wreath of garlics around her neck. Some one
insisted on giving her a glass. Somebody was teaching Bill a song.
Singing it into his ear. Beating time on Bill’s back.

I explained to them that I would be back. Outside in the street I went
down the street looking for the shop that made leather wine-bottles. The
crowd was packed on the sidewalks and many of the shops were shuttered,
and I could not find it. I walked as far as the church, looking on both
sides of the street. Then I asked a man and he took me by the arm and
led me to it. The shutters were up but the door was open.

Inside it smelled of fresh tanned leather and hot tar. A man was
stencilling completed wine-skins. They hung from the roof in bunches. He
took one down, blew it up, screwed the nozzle tight, and then jumped on
it

“See! It doesn’t leak.”

“I want another one, too. A big one.”

He took down a big one that would hold a gallon or more, from the roof.
He blew it up, his cheeks puffing ahead of the wine-skin, and stood on
the bota holding on to a chair.

“What are you going to do? Sell them in Bayonne?”

“No. Drink out of them.”

He slapped me on the back.

“Good man. Eight pesetas for the two. The lowest price.”

The man who was stencilling the new ones and tossing them into a pile
stopped.

“It’s true,” he said. “Eight pesetas is cheap.”

I paid and went out and along the street back to the wine-shop. It was
darker than ever inside and very crowded. I did not see Brett and Bill,
and some one said they were in the back room. At the counter the girl
filled the two wine-skins for me. One held two litres. The other held
five litres. Filling them both cost three pesetas sixty centimos. Some
one at the counter, that I had never seen before, tried to pay for the
wine, but I finally paid for it myself. The man who had wanted to pay
then bought me a drink. He would not let me buy one in return, but said
he would take a rinse of the mouth from the new wine-bag. He tipped the
big five-litre bag up and squeezed it so the wine hissed against the
back of his throat.

“All right,” he said, and handed back the bag.

In the back room Brett and Bill were sitting on barrels surrounded by
the dancers. Everybody had his arms on everybody else’s shoulders, and
they were all singing. Mike was sitting at a table with several men in
their shirt-sleeves, eating from a bowl of tuna fish, chopped onions and
vinegar. They were all drinking wine and mopping up the oil and vinegar
with pieces of bread.

“Hello, Jake. Hello!” Mike called. “Come here. I want you to meet my
friends. We’re all having an hors-d’œuvre.”

I was introduced to the people at the table. They supplied their names
to Mike and sent for a fork for me.

“Stop eating their dinner, Michael,” Brett shouted from the
wine-barrels.

“I don’t want to eat up your meal,” I said when some one handed me a
fork.

“Eat,” he said. “What do you think it’s here for?”

I unscrewed the nozzle of the big wine-bottle and handed it around.
Every one took a drink, tipping the wine-skin at arm’s length.

Outside, above the singing, we could hear the music of the procession
going by.

“Isn’t that the procession?” Mike asked.

“Nada,” some one said. “It’s nothing. Drink up. Lift the bottle.”

“Where did they find you?” I asked Mike.

“Some one brought me here,” Mike said. “They said you were here.”

“Where’s Cohn?”

“He’s passed out,” Brett called. “They’ve put him away somewhere.”

“Where is he?”

“I don’t know.”

“How should we know,” Bill said. “I think he’s dead.”

“He’s not dead,” Mike said. “I know he’s not dead. He’s just passed out
on Anis del Mono.”

As he said Anis del Mono one of the men at the table looked up, brought
out a bottle from inside his smock, and handed it to me.

“No,” I said. “No, thanks!”

“Yes. Yes. Arriba! Up with the bottle!”

I took a drink. It tasted of licorice and warmed all the way. I could
feel it warming in my stomach.

“Where the hell is Cohn?”

“I don’t know,” Mike said. “I’ll ask. Where is the drunken comrade?” he
asked in Spanish.

“You want to see him?”

“Yes,” I said.

“Not me,” said Mike. “This gent.”

The Anis del Mono man wiped his mouth and stood up.

“Come on.”

In a back room Robert Cohn was sleeping quietly on some wine-casks. It
was almost too dark to see his face. They had covered him with a coat
and another coat was folded under his head. Around his neck and on his
chest was a big wreath of twisted garlics.

“Let him sleep,” the man whispered. “He’s all right.”

Two hours later Cohn appeared. He came into the front room still with
the wreath of garlics around his neck. The Spaniards shouted when he
came in. Cohn wiped his eyes and grinned.

“I must have been sleeping,” he said.

“Oh, not at all,” Brett said.

“You were only dead,” Bill said.

“Aren’t we going to go and have some supper?” Cohn asked.

“Do you want to eat?”

“Yes. Why not? I’m hungry.”

“Eat those garlics, Robert,” Mike said. “I say. Do eat those garlics.”

Cohn stood there. His sleep had made him quite all right.

“Do let’s go and eat,” Brett said. “I must get a bath.”

“Come on,” Bill said. “Let’s translate Brett to the hotel.”

We said good-bye to many people and shook hands with many people and
went out. Outside it was dark.

“What time is it do you suppose?” Cohn asked.

“It’s to-morrow,” Mike said. “You’ve been asleep two days.”

“No,” said Cohn, “what time is it?”

“It’s ten o’clock.”

“What a lot we’ve drunk.”

“You mean what a lot _we’ve_ drunk. You went to sleep.”

Going down the dark streets to the hotel we saw the sky-rockets going up
in the square. Down the side streets that led to the square we saw the
square solid with people, those in the centre all dancing.

It was a big meal at the hotel. It was the first meal of the prices
being doubled for the fiesta, and there were several new courses. After
the dinner we were out in the town. I remember resolving that I would
stay up all night to watch the bulls go through the streets at six
o’clock in the morning, and being so sleepy that I went to bed around
four o’clock. The others stayed up.

My own room was locked and I could not find the key, so I went up-stairs
and slept on one of the beds in Cohn’s room. The fiesta was going on
outside in the night, but I was too sleepy for it to keep me awake. When
I woke it was the sound of the rocket exploding that announced the
release of the bulls from the corrals at the edge of town. They would
race through the streets and out to the bull-ring. I had been sleeping
heavily and I woke feeling I was too late. I put on a coat of Cohn’s and
went out on the balcony. Down below the narrow street was empty. All the
balconies were crowded with people. Suddenly a crowd came down the
street. They were all running, packed close together. They passed along
and up the street toward the bull-ring and behind them came more men
running faster, and then some stragglers who were really running. Behind
them was a little bare space, and then the bulls galloping, tossing
their heads up and down. It all went out of sight around the corner. One
man fell, rolled to the gutter, and lay quiet. But the bulls went right
on and did not notice him. They were all running together.

After they went out of sight a great roar came from the bull-ring. It
kept on. Then finally the pop of the rocket that meant the bulls had
gotten through the people in the ring and into the corrals. I went back
in the room and got into bed. I had been standing on the stone balcony
in bare feet. I knew our crowd must have all been out at the bull-ring.
Back in bed, I went to sleep.

Cohn woke me when he came in. He started to undress and went over and
closed the window because the people on the balcony of the house just
across the street were looking in.

“Did you see the show?” I asked.

“Yes. We were all there.”

“Anybody get hurt?”

“One of the bulls got into the crowd in the ring and tossed six or eight
people.”

“How did Brett like it?”

“It was all so sudden there wasn’t any time for it to bother anybody.”

“I wish I’d been up.”

“We didn’t know where you were. We went to your room but it was locked.”

“Where did you stay up?”

“We danced at some club.”

“I got sleepy,” I said.

“My gosh! I’m sleepy now,” Cohn said. “Doesn’t this thing ever stop?”

“Not for a week.”

Bill opened the door and put his head in.

“Where were you, Jake?”

“I saw them go through from the balcony. How was it?”

“Grand.”

“Where you going?”

“To sleep.”

No one was up before noon. We ate at tables set out under the arcade.
The town was full of people. We had to wait for a table. After lunch we
went over to the Iruña. It had filled up, and as the time for the
bull-fight came it got fuller, and the tables were crowded closer. There
was a close, crowded hum that came every day before the bull-fight. The
café did not make this same noise at any other time, no matter how
crowded it was. This hum went on, and we were in it and a part of it.

I had taken six seats for all the fights. Three of them were barreras,
the first row at the ring-side, and three were sobrepuertos, seats with
wooden backs, half-way up the amphitheatre. Mike thought Brett had best
sit high up for her first time, and Cohn wanted to sit with them. Bill
and I were going to sit in the barreras, and I gave the extra ticket to
a waiter to sell. Bill said something to Cohn about what to do and how
to look so he would not mind the horses. Bill had seen one season of
bull-fights.

“I’m not worried about how I’ll stand it. I’m only afraid I may be
bored,” Cohn said.

“You think so?”

“Don’t look at the horses, after the bull hits them,” I said to Brett.
“Watch the charge and see the picador try and keep the bull off, but
then don’t look again until the horse is dead if it’s been hit.”

“I’m a little nervy about it,” Brett said. “I’m worried whether I’ll be
able to go through with it all right.”

“You’ll be all right. There’s nothing but that horse part that will
bother you, and they’re only in for a few minutes with each bull. Just
don’t watch when it’s bad.”

“She’ll be all right,” Mike said. “I’ll look after her.”

“I don’t think you’ll be bored,” Bill said.

“I’m going over to the hotel to get the glasses and the wine-skin,” I
said. “See you back here. Don’t get cock-eyed.”

“I’ll come along,” Bill said. Brett smiled at us.

We walked around through the arcade to avoid the heat of the square.

“That Cohn gets me,” Bill said. “He’s got this Jewish superiority so
strong that he thinks the only emotion he’ll get out of the fight will
be being bored.”

“We’ll watch him with the glasses,” I said.

“Oh, to hell with him!”

“He spends a lot of time there.”

“I want him to stay there.”

In the hotel on the stairs we met Montoya.

“Come on,” said Montoya. “Do you want to meet Pedro Romero?”

“Fine,” said Bill. “Let’s go see him.”

We followed Montoya up a flight and down the corridor.

“He’s in room number eight,” Montoya explained. “He’s getting dressed
for the bull-fight.”

Montoya knocked on the door and opened it. It was a gloomy room with a
little light coming in from the window on the narrow street. There were
two beds separated by a monastic partition. The electric light was on.
The boy stood very straight and unsmiling in his bull-fighting clothes.
His jacket hung over the back of a chair. They were just finishing
winding his sash. His black hair shone under the electric light. He wore
a white linen shirt and the sword-handler finished his sash and stood up
and stepped back. Pedro Romero nodded, seeming very far away and
dignified when we shook hands. Montoya said something about what great
aficionados we were, and that we wanted to wish him luck. Romero
listened very seriously. Then he turned to me. He was the best-looking
boy I have ever seen.

“You go to the bull-fight,” he said in English.

“You know English,” I said, feeling like an idiot.

“No,” he answered, and smiled.

One of three men who had been sitting on the beds came up and asked us
if we spoke French. “Would you like me to interpret for you? Is there
anything you would like to ask Pedro Romero?”

We thanked him. What was there that you would like to ask? The boy was
nineteen years old, alone except for his sword-handler, and the three
hangers-on, and the bull-fight was to commence in twenty minutes. We
wished him “Mucha suerte,” shook hands, and went out. He was standing,
straight and handsome and altogether by himself, alone in the room with
the hangers-on as we shut the door.

“He’s a fine boy, don’t you think so?” Montoya asked.

“He’s a good-looking kid,” I said.

“He looks like a torero,” Montoya said. “He has the type.”

“He’s a fine boy.”

“We’ll see how he is in the ring,” Montoya said.

We found the big leather wine-bottle leaning against the wall in my
room, took it and the field-glasses, locked the door, and went
down-stairs.

It was a good bull-fight. Bill and I were very excited about Pedro
Romero. Montoya was sitting about ten places away. After Romero had
killed his first bull Montoya caught my eye and nodded his head. This
was a real one. There had not been a real one for a long time. Of the
other two matadors, one was very fair and the other was passable. But
there was no comparison with Romero, although neither of his bulls was
much.

Several times during the bull-fight I looked up at Mike and Brett and
Cohn, with the glasses. They seemed to be all right. Brett did not look
upset. All three were leaning forward on the concrete railing in front
of them.

“Let me take the glasses,” Bill said.

“Does Cohn look bored?” I asked.

“That kike!”

Outside the ring, after the bull-fight was over, you could not move in
the crowd. We could not make our way through but had to be moved with
the whole thing, slowly, as a glacier, back to town. We had that
disturbed emotional feeling that always comes after a bull-fight, and
the feeling of elation that comes after a good bull-fight. The fiesta
was going on. The drums pounded and the pipe music was shrill, and
everywhere the flow of the crowd was broken by patches of dancers. The
dancers were in a crowd, so you did not see the intricate play of the
feet. All you saw was the heads and shoulders going up and down, up and
down. Finally, we got out of the crowd and made for the café. The waiter
saved chairs for the others, and we each ordered an absinthe and watched
the crowd in the square and the dancers.

“What do you suppose that dance is?” Bill asked.

“It’s a sort of jota.”

“They’re not all the same,” Bill said. “They dance differently to all
the different tunes.”

“It’s swell dancing.”

In front of us on a clear part of the street a company of boys were
dancing. The steps were very intricate and their faces were intent and
concentrated. They all looked down while they danced. Their rope-soled
shoes tapped and spatted on the pavement. The toes touched. The heels
touched. The balls of the feet touched. Then the music broke wildly and
the step was finished and they were all dancing on up the street.

“Here come the gentry,” Bill said.

They were crossing the street

“Hello, men,” I said.

“Hello, gents!” said Brett. “You saved us seats? How nice.”

“I say,” Mike said, “that Romero what’shisname is somebody. Am I wrong?”

“Oh, isn’t he lovely,” Brett said. “And those green trousers.”

“Brett never took her eyes off them.”

“I say, I must borrow your glasses to-morrow.”

“How did it go?”

“Wonderfully! Simply perfect. I say, it is a spectacle!”

“How about the horses?”

“I couldn’t help looking at them.”

“She couldn’t take her eyes off them,” Mike said. “She’s an
extraordinary wench.”

“They do have some rather awful things happen to them,” Brett said. “I
couldn’t look away, though.”

“Did you feel all right?”

“I didn’t feel badly at all.”

“Robert Cohn did,” Mike put in. “You were quite green, Robert.”

“The first horse did bother me,” Cohn said.

“You weren’t bored, were you?” asked Bill.

Cohn laughed.

“No. I wasn’t bored. I wish you’d forgive me that.”

“It’s all right,” Bill said, “so long as you weren’t bored.”

“He didn’t look bored,” Mike said. “I thought he was going to be sick.”

“I never felt that bad. It was just for a minute.”

“I thought he was going to be sick. You weren’t bored, were you,
Robert?”

“Let up on that, Mike. I said I was sorry I said it.”

“He was, you know. He was positively green.”

“Oh, shove it along, Michael.”

“You mustn’t ever get bored at your first bull-fight, Robert,” Mike
said. “It might make such a mess.”

“Oh, shove it along, Michael,” Brett said.

“He said Brett was a sadist,” Mike said. “Brett’s not a sadist. She’s
just a lovely, healthy wench.”

“Are you a sadist, Brett?” I asked.

“Hope not.”

“He said Brett was a sadist just because she has a good, healthy
stomach.”

“Won’t be healthy long.”

Bill got Mike started on something else than Cohn. The waiter brought
the absinthe glasses.

“Did you really like it?” Bill asked Cohn.

“No, I can’t say I liked it. I think it’s a wonderful show.”

“Gad, yes! What a spectacle!” Brett said.

“I wish they didn’t have the horse part,” Cohn said.

“They’re not important,” Bill said. “After a while you never notice
anything disgusting.”

“It is a bit strong just at the start,” Brett said. “There’s a dreadful
moment for me just when the bull starts for the horse.”

“The bulls were fine,” Cohn said.

“They were very good,” Mike said.

“I want to sit down below, next time.” Brett drank from her glass of
absinthe.

“She wants to see the bull-fighters close by,” Mike said.

“They are something,” Brett said. “That Romero lad is just a child.”

“He’s a damned good-looking boy,” I said. “When we were up in his room I
never saw a better-looking kid.”

“How old do you suppose he is?”

“Nineteen or twenty.”

“Just imagine it.”

The bull-fight on the second day was much better than on the first.
Brett sat between Mike and me at the barrera, and Bill and Cohn went up
above. Romero was the whole show. I do not think Brett saw any other
bull-fighter. No one else did either, except the hard-shelled
technicians. It was all Romero. There were two other matadors, but they
did not count. I sat beside Brett and explained to Brett what it was all
about. I told her about watching the bull, not the horse, when the bulls
charged the picadors, and got her to watching the picador place the
point of his pic so that she saw what it was all about, so that it
became more something that was going on with a definite end, and less of
a spectacle with unexplained horrors. I had her watch how Romero took
the bull away from a fallen horse with his cape, and how he held him
with the cape and turned him, smoothly and suavely, never wasting the
bull. She saw how Romero avoided every brusque movement and saved his
bulls for the last when he wanted them, not winded and discomposed but
smoothly worn down. She saw how close Romero always worked to the bull,
and I pointed out to her the tricks the other bull-fighters used to make
it look as though they were working closely. She saw why she liked
Romero’s cape-work and why she did not like the others.

Romero never made any contortions, always it was straight and pure and
natural in line. The others twisted themselves like corkscrews, their
elbows raised, and leaned against the flanks of the bull after his horns
had passed, to give a faked look of danger. Afterward, all that was
faked turned bad and gave an unpleasant feeling. Romero’s bull-fighting
gave real emotion, because he kept the absolute purity of line in his
movements and always quietly and calmly let the horns pass him close
each time. He did not have to emphasize their closeness. Brett saw how
something that was beautiful done close to the bull was ridiculous if it
were done a little way off. I told her how since the death of Joselito
all the bull-fighters had been developing a technic that simulated this
appearance of danger in order to give a fake emotional feeling, while
the bull-fighter was really safe. Romero had the old thing, the holding
of his purity of line through the maximum of exposure, while he
dominated the bull by making him realize he was unattainable, while he
prepared him for the killing.

“I’ve never seen him do an awkward thing,” Brett said.

“You won’t until he gets frightened,” I said.

“He’ll never be frightened,” Mike said. “He knows too damned much.”

“He knew everything when he started. The others can’t ever learn what he
was born with.”

“And God, what looks,” Brett said.

“I believe, you know, that she’s falling in love with this bull-fighter
chap,” Mike said.

“I wouldn’t be surprised.”

“Be a good chap, Jake. Don’t tell her anything more about him. Tell her
how they beat their old mothers.”

“Tell me what drunks they are.”

“Oh, frightful,” Mike said. “Drunk all day and spend all their time
beating their poor old mothers.”

“He looks that way,” Brett said.

“Doesn’t he?” I said.

They had hitched the mules to the dead bull and then the whips cracked,
the men ran, and the mules, straining forward, their legs pushing, broke
into a gallop, and the bull, one horn up, his head on its side, swept a
swath smoothly across the sand and out the red gate.

“This next is the last one.”

“Not really,” Brett said. She leaned forward on the barrera. Romero
waved his picadors to their places, then stood, his cape against his
chest, looking across the ring to where the bull would come out.

After it was over we went out and were pressed tight in the crowd.

“These bull-fights are hell on one,” Brett said. “I’m limp as a rag.”

“Oh, you’ll get a drink,” Mike said.

The next day Pedro Romero did not fight. It was Miura bulls, and a very
bad bull-fight. The next day there was no bull-fight scheduled. But all
day and all night the fiesta kept on.




                                CHAPTER
                                   16


In the morning it was raining. A fog had come over the mountains from
the sea. You could not see the tops of the mountains. The plateau was
dull and gloomy, and the shapes of the trees and the houses were
changed. I walked out beyond the town to look at the weather. The bad
weather was coming over the mountains from the sea.

The flags in the square hung wet from the white poles and the banners
were wet and hung damp against the front of the houses, and in between
the steady drizzle the rain came down and drove every one under the
arcades and made pools of water in the square, and the streets wet and
dark and deserted; yet the fiesta kept up without any pause. It was only
driven under cover.

The covered seats of the bull-ring had been crowded with people sitting
out of the rain watching the concourse of Basque and Navarrais dancers
and singers, and afterward the Val Carlos dancers in their costumes
danced down the street in the rain, the drums sounding hollow and damp,
and the chiefs of the bands riding ahead on their big, heavy-footed
horses, their costumes wet, the horses’ coats wet in the rain. The crowd
was in the cafés and the dancers came in, too, and sat, their
tight-wound white legs under the tables, shaking the water from their
belled caps, and spreading their red and purple jackets over the chairs
to dry. It was raining hard outside.

I left the crowd in the café and went over to the hotel to get shaved
for dinner. I was shaving in my room when there was a knock on the door.

“Come in,” I called.

Montoya walked in.

“How are you?” he said.

“Fine,” I said.

“No bulls to-day.”

“No,” I said, “nothing but rain.”

“Where are your friends?”

“Over at the Iruña.”

Montoya smiled his embarrassed smile.

“Look,” he said. “Do you know the American ambassador?”

“Yes,” I said. “Everybody knows the American ambassador.”

“He’s here in town, now.”

“Yes,” I said. “Everybody’s seen them.”

“I’ve seen them, too,” Montoya said. He didn’t say anything. I went on
shaving.

“Sit down,” I said. “Let me send for a drink.”

“No, I have to go.”

I finished shaving and put my face down into the bowl and washed it with
cold water. Montoya was standing there looking more embarrassed.

“Look,” he said. “I’ve just had a message from them at the Grand Hotel
that they want Pedro Romero and Marcial Lalanda to come over for coffee
to-night after dinner.”

“Well,” I said, “it can’t hurt Marcial any.”

“Marcial has been in San Sebastian all day. He drove over in a car this
morning with Marquez. I don’t think they’ll be back to-night.”

Montoya stood embarrassed. He wanted me to say something.

“Don’t give Romero the message,” I said.

“You think so?”

“Absolutely.”

Montoya was very pleased.

“I wanted to ask you because you were an American,” he said.

“That’s what I’d do.”

“Look,” said Montoya. “People take a boy like that. They don’t know what
he’s worth. They don’t know what he means. Any foreigner can flatter
him. They start this Grand Hotel business, and in one year they’re
through.”

“Like Algabeno,” I said.

“Yes, like Algabeno.”

“They’re a fine lot,” I said. “There’s one American woman down here now
that collects bull-fighters.”

“I know. They only want the young ones.”

“Yes,” I said. “The old ones get fat.”

“Or crazy like Gallo.”

“Well,” I said, “it’s easy. All you have to do is not give him the
message.”

“He’s such a fine boy,” said Montoya. “He ought to stay with his own
people. He shouldn’t mix in that stuff.”

“Won’t you have a drink?” I asked.

“No,” said Montoya, “I have to go.” He went out.

I went down-stairs and out the door and took a walk around through the
arcades around the square. It was still raining. I looked in at the
Iruña for the gang and they were not there, so I walked on around the
square and back to the hotel. They were eating dinner in the down-stairs
dining-room.

They were well ahead of me and it was no use trying to catch them. Bill
was buying shoe-shines for Mike. Bootblacks opened the street door and
each one Bill called over and started to work on Mike.

“This is the eleventh time my boots have been polished,” Mike said. “I
say, Bill is an ass.”

The bootblacks had evidently spread the report. Another came in.

“Limpia botas?” he said to Bill.

“No,” said Bill. “For this Señor.”

The bootblack knelt down beside the one at work and started on Mike’s
free shoe that shone already in the electric light.

“Bill’s a yell of laughter,” Mike said.

I was drinking red wine, and so far behind them that I felt a little
uncomfortable about all this shoe-shining. I looked around the room. At
the next table was Pedro Romero. He stood up when I nodded, and asked me
to come over and meet a friend. His table was beside ours, almost
touching. I met the friend, a Madrid bull-fight critic, a little man
with a drawn face. I told Romero how much I liked his work, and he was
very pleased. We talked Spanish and the critic knew a little French. I
reached to our table for my wine-bottle, but the critic took my arm.
Romero laughed.

“Drink here,” he said in English.

He was very bashful about his English, but he was really very pleased
with it, and as we went on talking he brought out words he was not sure
of, and asked me about them. He was anxious to know the English for
_Corrida de toros_, the exact translation. Bull-fight he was suspicious
of. I explained that bull-fight in Spanish was the _lidia_ of a _toro_.
The Spanish word _corrida_ means in English the running of bulls—the
French translation is _Course de taureaux_. The critic put that in.
There is no Spanish word for bull-fight.

Pedro Romero said he had learned a little English in Gibraltar. He was
born in Ronda. That is not far above Gibraltar. He started bull-fighting
in Malaga in the bull-fighting school there. He had only been at it
three years. The bull-fight critic joked him about the number of
_Malagueño_ expressions he used. He was nineteen years old, he said. His
older brother was with him as a banderillero, but he did not live in
this hotel. He lived in a smaller hotel with the other people who worked
for Romero. He asked me how many times I had seen him in the ring. I
told him only three. It was really only two, but I did not want to
explain after I had made the mistake.

“Where did you see me the other time? In Madrid?”

“Yes,” I lied. I had read the accounts of his two appearances in Madrid
in the bull-fight papers, so I was all right.

“The first or the second time?”

“The first.”

“I was very bad,” he said. “The second time I was better. You remember?”
He turned to the critic.

He was not at all embarrassed. He talked of his work as something
altogether apart from himself. There was nothing conceited or braggartly
about him.

“I like it very much that you like my work,” he said. “But you haven’t
seen it yet. To-morrow, if I get a good bull, I will try and show it to
you.”

When he said this he smiled, anxious that neither the bull-fight critic
nor I would think he was boasting.

“I am anxious to see it,” the critic said. “I would like to be
convinced.”

“He doesn’t like my work much.” Romero turned to me. He was serious.

The critic explained that he liked it very much, but that so far it had
been incomplete.

“Wait till to-morrow, if a good one comes out.”

“Have you seen the bulls for to-morrow?” the critic asked me.

“Yes. I saw them unloaded.”

Pedro Romero leaned forward.

“What did you think of them?”

“Very nice,” I said. “About twenty-six arrobas. Very short horns.
Haven’t you seen them?”

“Oh, yes,” said Romero.

“They won’t weigh twenty-six arrobas,” said the critic.

“No,” said Romero.

“They’ve got bananas for horns,” the critic said.

“You call them bananas?” asked Romero. He turned to me and smiled.
“_You_ wouldn’t call them bananas?”

“No,” I said. “They’re horns all right.”

“They’re very short,” said Pedro Romero. “Very, very short. Still, they
aren’t bananas.”

“I say, Jake,” Brett called from the next table, “you _have_ deserted
us.”

“Just temporarily,” I said. “We’re talking bulls.”

“You _are_ superior.”

“Tell him that bulls have no balls,” Mike shouted. He was drunk.

Romero looked at me inquiringly.

“Drunk,” I said. “Borracho! Muy borracho!”

“You might introduce your friends,” Brett said. She had not stopped
looking at Pedro Romero. I asked them if they would like to have coffee
with us. They both stood up. Romero’s face was very brown. He had very
nice manners.

I introduced them all around and they started to sit down, but there was
not enough room, so we all moved over to the big table by the wall to
have coffee. Mike ordered a bottle of Fundador and glasses for
everybody. There was a lot of drunken talking.

“Tell him I think writing is lousy,” Bill said. “Go on, tell him. Tell
him I’m ashamed of being a writer.”

Pedro Romero was sitting beside Brett and listening to her.

“Go on. Tell him!” Bill said.

Romero looked up smiling.

“This gentleman,” I said, “is a writer.”

Romero was impressed. “This other one, too,” I said, pointing at Cohn.

“He looks like Villalta,” Romero said, looking at Bill. “Rafael, doesn’t
he look like Villalta?”

“I can’t see it,” the critic said.

“Really,” Romero said in Spanish. “He looks a lot like Villalta. What
does the drunken one do?”

“Nothing.”

“Is that why he drinks?”

“No. He’s waiting to marry this lady.”

“Tell him bulls have no balls!” Mike shouted, very drunk, from the other
end of the table.

“What does he say?”

“He’s drunk.”

“Jake,” Mike called. “Tell him bulls have no balls!”

“You understand?” I said.

“Yes.”

I was sure he didn’t, so it was all right.

“Tell him Brett wants to see him put on those green pants.”

“Pipe down, Mike.”

“Tell him Brett is dying to know how he can get into those pants.”

“Pipe down.”

During this Romero was fingering his glass and talking with Brett. Brett
was talking French and he was talking Spanish and a little English, and
laughing.

Bill was filling the glasses.

“Tell him Brett wants to come into——”

“Oh, pipe down, Mike, for Christ’s sake!”

Romero looked up smiling. “Pipe down! I know that,” he said.

Just then Montoya came into the room. He started to smile at me, then he
saw Pedro Romero with a big glass of cognac in his hand, sitting
laughing between me and a woman with bare shoulders, at a table full of
drunks. He did not even nod.

Montoya went out of the room. Mike was on his feet proposing a toast.
“Let’s all drink to—” he began. “Pedro Romero,” I said. Everybody stood
up. Romero took it very seriously, and we touched glasses and drank it
down, I rushing it a little because Mike was trying to make it clear
that that was not at all what he was going to drink to. But it went off
all right, and Pedro Romero shook hands with every one and he and the
critic went out together.

“My God! he’s a lovely boy,” Brett said. “And how I would love to see
him get into those clothes. He must use a shoe-horn.”

“I started to tell him,” Mike began. “And Jake kept interrupting me. Why
do you interrupt me? Do you think you talk Spanish better than I do?”

“Oh, shut up, Mike! Nobody interrupted you.”

“No, I’d like to get this settled.” He turned away from me. “Do you
think you amount to something, Cohn? Do you think you belong here among
us? People who are out to have a good time? For God’s sake don’t be so
noisy, Cohn!”

“Oh, cut it out, Mike,” Cohn said.

“Do you think Brett wants you here? Do you think you add to the party?
Why don’t you say something?”

“I said all I had to say the other night, Mike.”

“I’m not one of you literary chaps.” Mike stood shakily and leaned
against the table. “I’m not clever. But I do know when I’m not wanted.
Why don’t you see when you’re not wanted, Cohn? Go away. Go away, for
God’s sake. Take that sad Jewish face away. Don’t you think I’m right?”

He looked at us.

“Sure,” I said. “Let’s all go over to the Iruña.”

“No. Don’t you think I’m right? I love that woman.”

“Oh, don’t start that again. Do shove it along, Michael,” Brett said.

“Don’t you think I’m right, Jake?”

Cohn still sat at the table. His face had the sallow, yellow look it got
when he was insulted, but somehow he seemed to be enjoying it. The
childish, drunken heroics of it. It was his affair with a lady of title.

“Jake,” Mike said. He was almost crying. “You know I’m right. Listen,
you!” He turned to Cohn: “Go away! Go away now!”

“But I won’t go, Mike,” said Cohn.

“Then I’ll make you!” Mike started toward him around the table. Cohn
stood up and took off his glasses. He stood waiting, his face sallow,
his hands fairly low, proudly and firmly waiting for the assault, ready
to do battle for his lady love.

I grabbed Mike. “Come on to the café,” I said. “You can’t hit him here
in the hotel.”

“Good!” said Mike. “Good idea!”

We started off. I looked back as Mike stumbled up the stairs and saw
Cohn putting his glasses on again. Bill was sitting at the table pouring
another glass of Fundador. Brett was sitting looking straight ahead at
nothing.

Outside on the square it had stopped raining and the moon was trying to
get through the clouds. There was a wind blowing. The military band was
playing and the crowd was massed on the far side of the square where the
fireworks specialist and his son were trying to send up fire balloons. A
balloon would start up jerkily, on a great bias, and be torn by the wind
or blown against the houses of the square. Some fell into the crowd. The
magnesium flared and the fireworks exploded and chased about in the
crowd. There was no one dancing in the square. The gravel was too wet.

Brett came out with Bill and joined us. We stood in the crowd and
watched Don Manuel Orquito, the fireworks king, standing on a little
platform, carefully starting the balloons with sticks, standing above
the heads of the crowd to launch the balloons off into the wind. The
wind brought them all down, and Don Manuel Orquito’s face was sweaty in
the light of his complicated fireworks that fell into the crowd and
charged and chased, sputtering and cracking, between the legs of the
people. The people shouted as each new luminous paper bubble careened,
caught fire, and fell.

“They’re razzing Don Manuel,” Bill said.

“How do you know he’s Don Manuel?” Brett said.

“His name’s on the programme. Don Manuel Orquito, the pirotecnico of
esta ciudad.”

“Globos illuminados,” Mike said. “A collection of globos illuminados.
That’s what the paper said.”

The wind blew the band music away.

“I say, I wish one would go up,” Brett said. “That Don Manuel chap is
furious.”

“He’s probably worked for weeks fixing them to go off, spelling out
‘Hail to San Fermin,’” Bill said.

“Globos illuminados,” Mike said. “A bunch of bloody globos illuminados.”

“Come on,” said Brett. “We can’t stand here.”

“Her ladyship wants a drink,” Mike said.

“How you know things,” Brett said.

Inside, the café was crowded and very noisy. No one noticed us come in.
We could not find a table. There was a great noise going on.

“Come on, let’s get out of here,” Bill said.

Outside the paseo was going in under the arcade. There were some English
and Americans from Biarritz in sport clothes scattered at the tables.
Some of the women stared at the people going by with lorgnons. We had
acquired, at some time, a friend of Bill’s from Biarritz. She was
staying with another girl at the Grand Hotel. The other girl had a
headache and had gone to bed.

“Here’s the pub,” Mike said. It was the Bar Milano, a small, tough bar
where you could get food and where they danced in the back room. We all
sat down at a table and ordered a bottle of Fundador. The bar was not
full. There was nothing going on.

“This is a hell of a place,” Bill said.

“It’s too early.”

“Let’s take the bottle and come back later,” Bill said. “I don’t want to
sit here on a night like this.”

“Let’s go and look at the English,” Mike said. “I love to look at the
English.”

“They’re awful,” Bill said. “Where did they all come from?”

“They come from Biarritz,” Mike said, “They come to see the last day of
the quaint little Spanish fiesta.”

“I’ll festa them,” Bill said.

“You’re an extraordinarily beautiful girl.” Mike turned to Bill’s
friend. “When did you come here?”

“Come off it, Michael.”

“I say, she _is_ a lovely girl. Where have I been? Where have I been
looking all this while? You’re a lovely thing. _Have_ we met? Come along
with me and Bill. We’re going to festa the English.”

“I’ll festa them,” Bill said, “What the hell are they doing at this
fiesta?”

“Come on,” Mike said. “Just us three. We’re going to festa the bloody
English. I hope you’re not English? I’m Scotch. I hate the English. I’m
going to festa them. Come on, Bill.”

Through the window we saw them, all three arm in arm, going toward the
café. Rockets were going up in the square.

“I’m going to sit here,” Brett said.

“I’ll stay with you,” Cohn said.

“Oh, don’t!” Brett said. “For God’s sake, go off somewhere. Can’t you
see Jake and I want to talk?”

“I didn’t,” Cohn said. “I thought I’d sit here because I felt a little
tight.”

“What a hell of a reason for sitting with any one. If you’re tight, go
to bed. Go on to bed.”

“Was I rude enough to him?” Brett asked. Cohn was gone. “My God! I’m so
sick of him!”

“He doesn’t add much to the gayety.”

“He depresses me so.”

“He’s behaved very badly.”

“Damned badly. He had a chance to behave so well.”

“He’s probably waiting just outside the door now.”

“Yes. He would. You know I do know how he feels. He can’t believe it
didn’t mean anything.”

“I know.”

“Nobody else would behave as badly. Oh, I’m so sick of the whole thing.
And Michael. Michael’s been lovely, too.”

“It’s been damned hard on Mike.”

“Yes. But he didn’t need to be a swine.”

“Everybody behaves badly,” I said. “Give them the proper chance.”

“You wouldn’t behave badly.” Brett looked at me.

“I’d be as big an ass as Cohn,” I said.

“Darling, don’t let’s talk a lot of rot.”

“All right. Talk about anything you like.”

“Don’t be difficult. You’re the only person I’ve got, and I feel rather
awful to-night.”

“You’ve got Mike.”

“Yes, Mike. Hasn’t he been pretty?”

“Well,” I said, “it’s been damned hard on Mike, having Cohn around and
seeing him with you.”

“Don’t I know it, darling? Please don’t make me feel any worse than I
do.”

Brett was nervous as I had never seen her before. She kept looking away
from me and looking ahead at the wall.

“Want to go for a walk?”

“Yes. Come on.”

I corked up the Fundador bottle and gave it to the bartender.

“Let’s have one more drink of that,” Brett said. “My nerves are rotten.”

We each drank a glass of the smooth amontillado brandy.

“Come on,” said Brett.

As we came out the door I saw Cohn walk out from under the arcade.

“He _was_ there,” Brett said.

“He can’t be away from you.”

“Poor devil!”

“I’m not sorry for him. I hate him, myself.”

“I hate him, too,” she shivered. “I hate his damned suffering.”

We walked arm in arm down the side street away from the crowd and the
lights of the square. The street was dark and wet, and we walked along
it to the fortifications at the edge of town. We passed wine-shops with
light coming out from their doors onto the black, wet street, and sudden
bursts of music.

“Want to go in?”

“No.”

We walked out across the wet grass and onto the stone wall of the
fortifications. I spread a newspaper on the stone and Brett sat down.
Across the plain it was dark, and we could see the mountains. The wind
was high up and took the clouds across the moon. Below us were the dark
pits of the fortifications. Behind were the trees and the shadow of the
cathedral, and the town silhouetted against the moon.

“Don’t feel bad,” I said.

“I feel like hell,” Brett said. “Don’t let’s talk.”

We looked out at the plain. The long lines of trees were dark in the
moonlight. There were the lights of a car on the road climbing the
mountain. Up on the top of the mountain we saw the lights of the fort.
Below to the left was the river. It was high from the rain, and black
and smooth. Trees were dark along the banks. We sat and looked out.
Brett stared straight ahead. Suddenly she shivered.

“It’s cold.”

“Want to walk back?”

“Through the park.”

We climbed down. It was clouding over again. In the park it was dark
under the trees.

“Do you still love me, Jake?”

“Yes,” I said.

“Because I’m a goner,” Brett said.

“How?”

“I’m a goner. I’m mad about the Romero boy. I’m in love with him, I
think.”

“I wouldn’t be if I were you.”

“I can’t help it. I’m a goner. It’s tearing me all up inside.”

“Don’t do it.”

“I can’t help it. I’ve never been able to help anything.”

“You ought to stop it.”

“How can I stop it? I can’t stop things. Feel that?”

Her hand was trembling.

“I’m like that all through.”

“You oughtn’t to do it.”

“I can’t help it. I’m a goner now, anyway. Don’t you see the
difference?”

“No.”

“I’ve got to do something. I’ve got to do something I really want to do.
I’ve lost my self-respect.”

“You don’t have to do that.”

“Oh, darling, don’t be difficult. What do you think it’s meant to have
that damned Jew about, and Mike the way he’s acted?”

“Sure.”

“I can’t just stay tight all the time.”

“No.”

“Oh, darling, please stay by me. Please stay by me and see me through
this.”

“Sure.”

“I don’t say it’s right. It is right though for me. God knows, I’ve
never felt such a bitch.”

“What do you want me to do?”

“Come on,” Brett said. “Let’s go and find him.”

Together we walked down the gravel path in the park in the dark, under
the trees and then out from under the trees and past the gate into the
street that led into town.

Pedro Romero was in the café. He was at a table with other bull-fighters
and bull-fight critics. They were smoking cigars. When we came in they
looked up. Romero smiled and bowed. We sat down at a table half-way down
the room.

“Ask him to come over and have a drink.”

“Not yet. He’ll come over.”

“I can’t look at him.”

“He’s nice to look at,” I said.

“I’ve always done just what I wanted.”

“I know.”

“I do feel such a bitch.”

“Well,” I said.

“My God!” said Brett, “the things a woman goes through.”

“Yes?”

“Oh, I do feel such a bitch.”

I looked across at the table. Pedro Romero smiled. He said something to
the other people at his table, and stood up. He came over to our table.
I stood up and we shook hands.

“Won’t you have a drink?”

“You must have a drink with me,” he said. He seated himself, asking
Brett’s permission without saying anything. He had very nice manners.
But he kept on smoking his cigar. It went well with his face.

“You like cigars?” I asked.

“Oh, yes. I always smoke cigars.”

It was part of his system of authority. It made him seem older. I
noticed his skin. It was clear and smooth and very brown. There was a
triangular scar on his cheek-bone. I saw he was watching Brett. He felt
there was something between them. He must have felt it when Brett gave
him her hand. He was being very careful. I think he was sure, but he did
not want to make any mistake.

“You fight to-morrow?” I said.

“Yes,” he said. “Algabeno was hurt to-day in Madrid. Did you hear?”

“No,” I said. “Badly?”

He shook his head.

“Nothing. Here,” he showed his hand. Brett reached out and spread the
fingers apart.

“Oh!” he said in English, “you tell fortunes?”

“Sometimes. Do you mind?”

“No. I like it.” He spread his hand flat on the table. “Tell me I live
for always, and be a millionaire.”

He was still very polite, but he was surer of himself. “Look,” he said,
“do you see any bulls in my hand?”

He laughed. His hand was very fine and the wrist was small.

“There are thousands of bulls,” Brett said. She was not at all nervous
now. She looked lovely.

“Good,” Romero laughed. “At a thousand duros apiece,” he said to me in
Spanish. “Tell me some more.”

“It’s a good hand,” Brett said. “I think he’ll live a long time.”

“Say it to me. Not to your friend.”

“I said you’d live a long time.”

“I know it,” Romero said. “I’m never going to die.”

I tapped with my finger-tips on the table. Romero saw it. He shook his
head.

“No. Don’t do that. The bulls are my best friends.”

I translated to Brett.

“You kill your friends?” she asked.

“Always,” he said in English, and laughed. “So they don’t kill me.” He
looked at her across the table.

“You know English well.”

“Yes,” he said. “Pretty well, sometimes. But I must not let anybody
know. It would be very bad, a torero who speaks English.”

“Why?” asked Brett.

“It would be bad. The people would not like it. Not yet.”

“Why not?”

“They would not like it. Bull-fighters are not like that.”

“What are bull-fighters like?”

He laughed and tipped his hat down over his eyes and changed the angle
of his cigar and the expression of his face.

“Like at the table,” he said. I glanced over. He had mimicked exactly
the expression of Nacional. He smiled, his face natural again. “No. I
must forget English.”

“Don’t forget it, yet,” Brett said.

“No?”

“No.”

“All right.”

He laughed again.

“I would like a hat like that,” Brett said.

“Good. I’ll get you one.”

“Right. See that you do.”

“I will. I’ll get you one to-night.”

I stood up. Romero rose, too.

“Sit down,” I said. “I must go and find our friends and bring them
here.”

He looked at me. It was a final look to ask if it were understood. It
was understood all right.

“Sit down,” Brett said to him. “You must teach me Spanish.”

He sat down and looked at her across the table. I went out. The
hard-eyed people at the bull-fighter table watched me go. It was not
pleasant. When I came back and looked in the café, twenty minutes later,
Brett and Pedro Romero were gone. The coffee-glasses and our three empty
cognac-glasses were on the table. A waiter came with a cloth and picked
up the glasses and mopped off the table.




                                CHAPTER
                                   17


Outside the Bar Milano I found Bill and Mike and Edna. Edna was the
girl’s name.

“We’ve been thrown out,” Edna said.

“By the police,” said Mike. “There’s some people in there that don’t
like me.”

“I’ve kept them out of four fights,” Edna said. “You’ve got to help me.”

Bill’s face was red.

“Come back in, Edna,” he said. “Go on in there and dance with Mike.”

“It’s silly,” Edna said. “There’ll just be another row.”

“Damned Biarritz swine,” Bill said.

“Come on,” Mike said. “After all, it’s a pub. They can’t occupy a whole
pub.”

“Good old Mike,” Bill said. “Damned English swine come here and insult
Mike and try and spoil the fiesta.”

“They’re so bloody,” Mike said. “I hate the English.”

“They can’t insult Mike,” Bill said. “Mike is a swell fellow. They can’t
insult Mike. I won’t stand it. Who cares if he is a damn bankrupt?” His
voice broke.

“Who cares?” Mike said. “I don’t care. Jake doesn’t care. Do _you_
care?”

“No,” Edna said. “Are you a bankrupt?”

“Of course I am. You don’t care, do you, Bill?”

Bill put his arm around Mike’s shoulder.

“I wish to hell I was a bankrupt. I’d show those bastards.”

“They’re just English,” Mike said. “It never makes any difference what
the English say.”

“The dirty swine,” Bill said. “I’m going to clean them out.”

“Bill,” Edna looked at me. “Please don’t go in again, Bill. They’re so
stupid.”

“That’s it,” said Mike. “They’re stupid. I knew that was what it was.”

“They can’t say things like that about Mike,” Bill said.

“Do you know them?” I asked Mike.

“No. I never saw them. They say they know me.”

“I won’t stand it,” Bill said.

“Come on. Let’s go over to the Suizo,” I said.

“They’re a bunch of Edna’s friends from Biarritz,” Bill said.

“They’re simply stupid,” Edna said.

“One of them’s Charley Blackman, from Chicago,” Bill said.

“I was never in Chicago,” Mike said.

Edna started to laugh and could not stop.

“Take me away from here,” she said, “you bankrupts.”

“What kind of a row was it?” I asked Edna. We were walking across the
square to the Suizo. Bill was gone.

“I don’t know what happened, but some one had the police called to keep
Mike out of the back room. There were some people that had known Mike at
Cannes. What’s the matter with Mike?”

“Probably he owes them money” I said. “That’s what people usually get
bitter about.”

In front of the ticket-booths out in the square there were two lines of
people waiting. They were sitting on chairs or crouched on the ground
with blankets and newspapers around them. They were waiting for the
wickets to open in the morning to buy tickets for the bull-fight. The
night was clearing and the moon was out. Some of the people in the line
were sleeping.

At the Café Suizo we had just sat down and ordered Fundador when Robert
Cohn came up.

“Where’s Brett?” he asked.

“I don’t know.”

“She was with you.”

“She must have gone to bed.”

“She’s not.”

“I don’t know where she is.”

His face was sallow under the light. He was standing up.

“Tell me where she is.”

“Sit down,” I said. “I don’t know where she is.”

“The hell you don’t!”

“You can shut your face.”

“Tell me where Brett is.”

“I’ll not tell you a damn thing.”

“You know where she is.”

“If I did I wouldn’t tell you.”

“Oh, go to hell, Cohn,” Mike called from the table. “Brett’s gone off
with the bull-fighter chap. They’re on their honeymoon.”

“You shut up.”

“Oh, go to hell!” Mike said languidly.

“Is that where she is?” Cohn turned to me.

“Go to hell!”

“She was with you. Is that where she is?”

“Go to hell!”

“I’ll make you tell me”—he stepped forward—“you damned pimp.”

I swung at him and he ducked. I saw his face duck sideways in the light.
He hit me and I sat down on the pavement. As I started to get on my feet
he hit me twice. I went down backward under a table. I tried to get up
and felt I did not have any legs. I felt I must get on my feet and try
and hit him. Mike helped me up. Some one poured a carafe of water on my
head. Mike had an arm around me, and I found I was sitting on a chair.
Mike was pulling at my ears.

“I say, you were cold,” Mike said.

“Where the hell were you?”

“Oh, I was around.”

“You didn’t want to mix in it?”

“He knocked Mike down, too,” Edna said.

“He didn’t knock me out,” Mike said. “I just lay there.”

“Does this happen every night at your fiestas?” Edna asked. “Wasn’t that
Mr. Cohn?”

“I’m all right,” I said. “My head’s a little wobbly.”

There were several waiters and a crowd of people standing around.

“Vaya!” said Mike. “Get away. Go on.”

The waiters moved the people away.

“It was quite a thing to watch,” Edna said. “He must be a boxer.”

“He is.”

“I wish Bill had been here,” Edna said. “I’d like to have seen Bill
knocked down, too. I’ve always wanted to see Bill knocked down. He’s so
big.”

“I was hoping he would knock down a waiter,” Mike said, “and get
arrested. I’d like to see Mr. Robert Cohn in jail.”

“No,” I said.

“Oh, no,” said Edna. “You don’t mean that.”

“I do, though,” Mike said. “I’m not one of these chaps likes being
knocked about. I never play games, even.”

Mike took a drink.

“I never liked to hunt, you know. There was always the danger of having
a horse fall on you. How do you feel, Jake?”

“All right.”

“You’re nice,” Edna said to Mike. “Are you really a bankrupt?”

“I’m a tremendous bankrupt,” Mike said. “I owe money to everybody. Don’t
you owe any money?”

“Tons.”

“I owe everybody money,” Mike said. “I borrowed a hundred pesetas from
Montoya to-night.”

“The hell you did,” I said.

“I’ll pay it back,” Mike said. “I always pay everything back.”

“That’s why you’re a bankrupt, isn’t it?” Edna said.

I stood up. I had heard them talking from a long way away. It all seemed
like some bad play.

“I’m going over to the hotel,” I said. Then I heard them talking about
me.

“Is he all right?” Edna asked.

“We’d better walk with him.”

“I’m all right,” I said. “Don’t come. I’ll see you all later.”

I walked away from the café. They were sitting at the table. I looked
back at them and at the empty tables. There was a waiter sitting at one
of the tables with his head in his hands.

Walking across the square to the hotel everything looked new and
changed. I had never seen the trees before. I had never seen the
flagpoles before, nor the front of the theatre. It was all different. I
felt as I felt once coming home from an out-of-town football game. I was
carrying a suitcase with my football things in it, and I walked up the
street from the station in the town I had lived in all my life and it
was all new. They were raking the lawns and burning leaves in the road,
and I stopped for a long time and watched. It was all strange. Then I
went on, and my feet seemed to be a long way off, and everything seemed
to come from a long way off, and I could hear my feet walking a great
distance away. I had been kicked in the head early in the game. It was
like that crossing the square. It was like that going up the stairs in
the hotel. Going up the stairs took a long time, and I had the feeling
that I was carrying my suitcase. There was a light in the room. Bill
came out and met me in the hall.

“Say,” he said, “go up and see Cohn. He’s been in a jam, and he’s asking
for you.”

“The hell with him.”

“Go on. Go on up and see him.”

I did not want to climb another flight of stairs.

“What are you looking at me that way for?”

“I’m not looking at you. Go on up and see Cohn. He’s in bad shape.”

“You were drunk a little while ago,” I said.

“I’m drunk now,” Bill said. “But you go up and see Cohn. He wants to see
you.”

“All right,” I said. It was just a matter of climbing more stairs. I
went on up the stairs carrying my phantom suitcase. I walked down the
hall to Cohn’s room. The door was shut and I knocked.

“Who is it?”

“Barnes.”

“Come in, Jake.”

I opened the door and went in, and set down my suitcase. There was no
light in the room. Cohn was lying, face down, on the bed in the dark.

“Hello, Jake.”

“Don’t call me Jake.”

I stood by the door. It was just like this that I had come home. Now it
was a hot bath that I needed. A deep, hot bath, to lie back in.

“Where’s the bathroom?” I asked.

Cohn was crying. There he was, face down on the bed, crying. He had on a
white polo shirt, the kind he’d worn at Princeton.

“I’m sorry, Jake. Please forgive me.”

“Forgive you, hell.”

“Please forgive me, Jake.”

I did not say anything. I stood there by the door.

“I was crazy. You must see how it was.”

“Oh, that’s all right.”

“I couldn’t stand it about Brett.”

“You called me a pimp.”

I did not care. I wanted a hot bath. I wanted a hot bath in deep water.

“I know. Please don’t remember it. I was crazy.”

“That’s all right.”

He was crying. His voice was funny. He lay there in his white shirt on
the bed in the dark. His polo shirt.

“I’m going away in the morning.”

He was crying without making any noise.

“I just couldn’t stand it about Brett. I’ve been through hell, Jake.
It’s been simply hell. When I met her down here Brett treated me as
though I were a perfect stranger. I just couldn’t stand it. We lived
together at San Sebastian. I suppose you know it. I can’t stand it any
more.”

He lay there on the bed.

“Well,” I said, “I’m going to take a bath.”

“You were the only friend I had, and I loved Brett so.”

“Well,” I said, “so long.”

“I guess it isn’t any use,” he said. “I guess it isn’t any damn use.”

“What?”

“Everything. Please say you forgive me, Jake.”

“Sure,” I said. “It’s all right.”

“I felt so terribly. I’ve been through such hell, Jake. Now everything’s
gone. Everything.”

“Well,” I said, “so long. I’ve got to go.”

He rolled over, sat on the edge of the bed, and then stood up.

“So long, Jake,” he said. “You’ll shake hands, won’t you?”

“Sure. Why not?”

We shook hands. In the dark I could not see his face very well.

“Well,” I said, “see you in the morning.”

“I’m going away in the morning.”

“Oh, yes,” I said.

I went out. Cohn was standing in the door of the room.

“Are you all right, Jake?” he asked.

“Oh, yes,” I said. “I’m all right.”

I could not find the bathroom. After a while I found it. There was a
deep stone tub. I turned on the taps and the water would not run. I sat
down on the edge of the bath-tub. When I got up to go I found I had
taken off my shoes. I hunted for them and found them and carried them
down-stairs. I found my room and went inside and undressed and got into
bed.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I woke with a headache and the noise of the bands going by in the
street. I remembered I had promised to take Bill’s friend Edna to see
the bulls go through the street and into the ring. I dressed and went
down-stairs and out into the cold early morning. People were crossing
the square, hurrying toward the bull-ring. Across the square were the
two lines of men in front of the ticket-booths. They were still waiting
for the tickets to go on sale at seven o’clock. I hurried across the
street to the café. The waiter told me that my friends had been there
and gone.

“How many were they?”

“Two gentlemen and a lady.”

That was all right. Bill and Mike were with Edna. She had been afraid
last night they would pass out. That was why I was to be sure to take
her. I drank the coffee and hurried with the other people toward the
bull-ring. I was not groggy now. There was only a bad headache.
Everything looked sharp and clear, and the town smelt of the early
morning.

The stretch of ground from the edge of the town to the bull-ring was
muddy. There was a crowd all along the fence that led to the ring, and
the outside balconies and the top of the bull-ring were solid with
people. I heard the rocket and I knew I could not get into the ring in
time to see the bulls come in, so I shoved through the crowd to the
fence. I was pushed close against the planks of the fence. Between the
two fences of the runway the police were clearing the crowd along. They
walked or trotted on into the bull-ring. Then people commenced to come
running. A drunk slipped and fell. Two policemen grabbed him and rushed
him over to the fence. The crowd were running fast now. There was a
great shout from the crowd, and putting my head through between the
boards I saw the bulls just coming out of the street into the long
running pen. They were going fast and gaining on the crowd. Just then
another drunk started out from the fence with a blouse in his hands. He
wanted to do capework with the bulls. The two policemen tore out,
collared him, one hit him with a club, and they dragged him against the
fence and stood flattened out against the fence as the last of the crowd
and the bulls went by. There were so many people running ahead of the
bulls that the mass thickened and slowed up going through the gate into
the ring, and as the bulls passed, galloping together, heavy,
muddy-sided, horns swinging, one shot ahead, caught a man in the running
crowd in the back and lifted him in the air. Both the man’s arms were by
his sides, his head went back as the horn went in, and the bull lifted
him and then dropped him. The bull picked another man running in front,
but the man disappeared into the crowd, and the crowd was through the
gate and into the ring with the bulls behind them. The red door of the
ring went shut, the crowd on the outside balconies of the bull-ring were
pressing through to the inside, there was a shout, then another shout.

The man who had been gored lay face down in the trampled mud. People
climbed over the fence, and I could not see the man because the crowd
was so thick around him. From inside the ring came the shouts. Each
shout meant a charge by some bull into the crowd. You could tell by the
degree of intensity in the shout how bad a thing it was that was
happening. Then the rocket went up that meant the steers had gotten the
bulls out of the ring and into the corrals. I left the fence and started
back toward the town.

Back in the town I went to the café to have a second coffee and some
buttered toast. The waiters were sweeping out the café and mopping off
the tables. One came over and took my order.

“Anything happen at the encierro?”

“I didn’t see it all. One man was badly cogido.”

“Where?”

“Here.” I put one hand on the small of my back and the other on my
chest, where it looked as though the horn must have come through. The
waiter nodded his head and swept the crumbs from the table with his
cloth.

“Badly cogido,” he said. “All for sport. All for pleasure.”

He went away and came back with the long-handled coffee and milk pots.
He poured the milk and coffee. It came out of the long spouts in two
streams into the big cup. The waiter nodded his head.

“Badly cogido through the back,” he said. He put the pots down on the
table and sat down in the chair at the table. “A big horn wound. All for
fun. Just for fun. What do you think of that?”

“I don’t know.”

“That’s it. All for fun. Fun, you understand.”

“You’re not an aficionado?”

“Me? What are bulls? Animals. Brute animals.” He stood up and put his
hand on the small of his back. “Right through the back. A cornada right
through the back. For fun—you understand.”

He shook his head and walked away, carrying the coffee-pots. Two men
were going by in the street. The waiter shouted to them. They were
grave-looking. One shook his head. “Muerto!” he called.

The waiter nodded his head. The two men went on. They were on some
errand. The waiter came over to my table.

“You hear? Muerto. Dead. He’s dead. With a horn through him. All for
morning fun. Es muy flamenco.”

“It’s bad.”

“Not for me,” the waiter said. “No fun in that for me.”

Later in the day we learned that the man who was killed was named
Vicente Girones, and came from near Tafalla. The next day in the paper
we read that he was twenty-eight years old, and had a farm, a wife, and
two children. He had continued to come to the fiesta each year after he
was married. The next day his wife came in from Tafalla to be with the
body, and the day after there was a service in the chapel of San Fermin,
and the coffin was carried to the railway-station by members of the
dancing and drinking society of Tafalla. The drums marched ahead, and
there was music on the fifes, and behind the men who carried the coffin
walked the wife and two children. . . . Behind them marched all the
members of the dancing and drinking societies of Pamplona, Estella,
Tafalla, and Sanguesa who could stay over for the funeral. The coffin
was loaded into the baggage-car of the train, and the widow and the two
children rode, sitting, all three together, in an open third-class
railway-carriage. The train started with a jerk, and then ran smoothly,
going down grade around the edge of the plateau and out into the fields
of grain that blew in the wind on the plain on the way to Tafalla.

The bull who killed Vicente Girones was named Bocanegra, was Number 118
of the bull-breeding establishment of Sanchez Tabemo, and was killed by
Pedro Romero as the third bull of that same afternoon. His ear was cut
by popular acclamation and given to Pedro Romero, who, in turn, gave it
to Brett, who wrapped it in a handkerchief belonging to myself, and left
both ear and handkerchief, along with a number of Muratti
cigarette-stubs, shoved far back in the drawer of the bed-table that
stood beside her bed in the Hotel Montoya, in Pamplona.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Back in the hotel, the night watchman was sitting on a bench inside the
door. He had been there all night and was very sleepy. He stood up as I
came in. Three of the waitresses came in at the same time. They had been
to the morning show at the bull-ring. They went up-stairs laughing. I
followed them up-stairs and went into my room. I took off my shoes and
lay down on the bed. The window was open onto the balcony and the
sunlight was bright in the room. I did not feel sleepy. It must have
been half past three o’clock when I had gone to bed and the bands had
waked me at six. My jaw was sore on both sides. I felt it with my thumb
and fingers. That damn Cohn. He should have hit somebody the first time
he was insulted, and then gone away. He was so sure that Brett loved
him. He was going to stay, and true love would conquer all. Some one
knocked on the door.

“Come in.”

It was Bill and Mike. They sat down on the bed.

“Some encierro,” Bill said. “Some encierro.”

“I say, weren’t you there?” Mike asked. “Ring for some beer, Bill.”

“What a morning!” Bill said. He mopped off his face. “My God! what a
morning! And here’s old Jake. Old Jake, the human punching-bag.”

“What happened inside?”

“Good God!” Bill said, “what happened, Mike?”

“There were these bulls coming in,” Mike said. “Just ahead of them was
the crowd, and some chap tripped and brought the whole lot of them
down.”

“And the bulls all came in right over them,” Bill said.

“I heard them yell.”

“That was Edna,” Bill said.

“Chaps kept coming out and waving their shirts.”

“One bull went along the barrera and hooked everybody over.”

“They took about twenty chaps to the infirmary,” Mike said.

“What a morning!” Bill said. “The damn police kept arresting chaps that
wanted to go and commit suicide with the bulls.”

“The steers took them in, in the end,” Mike said.

“It took about an hour.”

“It was really about a quarter of an hour,” Mike objected.

“Oh, go to hell,” Bill said. “You’ve been in the war. It was two hours
and a half for me.”

“Where’s that beer?” Mike asked.

“What did you do with the lovely Edna?”

“We took her home just now. She’s gone to bed.”

“How did she like it?”

“Fine. We told her it was just like that every morning.”

“She was impressed,” Mike said.

“She wanted us to go down in the ring, too,” Bill said. “She likes
action.”

“I said it wouldn’t be fair to my creditors,” Mike said.

“What a morning,” Bill said. “And what a night!”

“How’s your jaw, Jake?” Mike asked.

“Sore,” I said.

Bill laughed.

“Why didn’t you hit him with a chair?”

“You can talk,” Mike said. “He’d have knocked you out, too. I never saw
him hit me. I rather think I saw him just before, and then quite
suddenly I was sitting down in the street, and Jake was lying under a
table.”

“Where did he go afterward?” I asked.

“Here she is,” Mike said. “Here’s the beautiful lady with the beer.”

The chambermaid put the tray with the beer-bottles and glasses down on
the table.

“Now bring up three more bottles,” Mike said.

“Where did Cohn go after he hit me?” I asked Bill.

“Don’t you know about that?” Mike was opening a beer-bottle. He poured
the beer into one of the glasses, holding the glass close to the bottle.

“Really?” Bill asked.

“Why he went in and found Brett and the bull-fighter chap in the
bull-fighter’s room, and then he massacred the poor, bloody
bull-fighter.”

“No.”

“Yes.”

“What a night!” Bill said.

“He nearly killed the poor, bloody bull-fighter. Then Cohn wanted to
take Brett away. Wanted to make an honest woman of her, I imagine.
Damned touching scene.”

He took a long drink of the beer.

“He is an ass.”

“What happened?”

“Brett gave him what for. She told him off. I think she was rather
good.”

“I’ll bet she was,” Bill said.

“Then Cohn broke down and cried, and wanted to shake hands with the
bull-fighter fellow. He wanted to shake hands with Brett, too.”

“I know. He shook hands with me.”

“Did he? Well, they weren’t having any of it. The bull-fighter fellow
was rather good. He didn’t say much, but he kept getting up and getting
knocked down again. Cohn couldn’t knock him out. It must have been
damned funny.”

“Where did you hear all this?”

“Brett. I saw her this morning.”

“What happened finally?”

“It seems the bull-fighter fellow was sitting on the bed. He’d been
knocked down about fifteen times, and he wanted to fight some more.
Brett held him and wouldn’t let him get up. He was weak, but Brett
couldn’t hold him, and he got up. Then Cohn said he wouldn’t hit him
again. Said he couldn’t do it. Said it would be wicked. So the
bull-fighter chap sort of rather staggered over to him. Cohn went back
against the wall.

“‘So you won’t hit me?’

“‘No,’ said Cohn. ‘I’d be ashamed to.’

“So the bull-fighter fellow hit him just as hard as he could in the
face, and then sat down on the floor. He couldn’t get up, Brett said.
Cohn wanted to pick him up and carry him to the bed. He said if Cohn
helped him he’d kill him, and he’d kill him anyway this morning if Cohn
wasn’t out of town. Cohn was crying, and Brett had told him off, and he
wanted to shake hands. I’ve told you that before.”

“Tell the rest,” Bill said.

“It seems the bull-fighter chap was sitting on the floor. He was waiting
to get strength enough to get up and hit Cohn again. Brett wasn’t having
any shaking hands, and Cohn was crying and telling her how much he loved
her, and she was telling him not to be a ruddy ass. Then Cohn leaned
down to shake hands with the bull-fighter fellow. No hard feelings, you
know. All for forgiveness. And the bull-fighter chap hit him in the face
again.”

“That’s quite a kid,” Bill said.

“He ruined Cohn,” Mike said. “You know I don’t think Cohn will ever want
to knock people about again.”

“When did you see Brett?”

“This morning. She came in to get some things. She’s looking after this
Romero lad.”

He poured out another bottle of beer.

“Brett’s rather cut up. But she loves looking after people. That’s how
we came to go off together. She was looking after me.”

“I know,” I said.

“I’m rather drunk,” Mike said. “I think I’ll _stay_ rather drunk. This
is all awfully amusing, but it’s not too pleasant. It’s not too pleasant
for me.”

He drank off the beer.

“I gave Brett what for, you know. I said if she would go about with Jews
and bull-fighters and such people, she must expect trouble.” He leaned
forward. “I say, Jake, do you mind if I drink that bottle of yours?
She’ll bring you another one.”

“Please,” I said. “I wasn’t drinking it, anyway.”

Mike started to open the bottle. “Would you mind opening it?” I pressed
up the wire fastener and poured it for him.

“You know,” Mike went on, “Brett was rather good. She’s always rather
good. I gave her a fearful hiding about Jews and bull-fighters, and all
those sort of people, and do you know what she said: ‘Yes. I’ve had such
a hell of a happy life with the British aristocracy!’”

He took a drink.

“That was rather good. Ashley, chap she got the title from, was a
sailor, you know. Ninth baronet. When he came home he wouldn’t sleep in
a bed. Always made Brett sleep on the floor. Finally, when he got really
bad, he used to tell her he’d kill her. Always slept with a loaded
service revolver. Brett used to take the shells out when he’d gone to
sleep. She hasn’t had an absolutely happy life. Brett. Damned shame,
too. She enjoys things so.”

He stood up. His hand was shaky.

“I’m going in the room. Try and get a little sleep.”

He smiled.

“We go too long without sleep in these fiestas. I’m going to start now
and get plenty of sleep. Damn bad thing not to get sleep. Makes you
frightfully nervy.”

“We’ll see you at noon at the Iruña,” Bill said.

Mike went out the door. We heard him in the next room.

He rang the bell and the chambermaid came and knocked at the door.

“Bring up half a dozen bottles of beer and a bottle of Fundador,” Mike
told her.

“Si, Señorito.”

“I’m going to bed,” Bill said. “Poor old Mike. I had a hell of a row
about him last night.”

“Where? At that Milano place?”

“Yes. There was a fellow there that had helped pay Brett and Mike out of
Cannes, once. He was damned nasty.”

“I know the story.”

“I didn’t. Nobody ought to have a right to say things about Mike.”

“That’s what makes it bad.”

“They oughtn’t to have any right. I wish to hell they didn’t have any
right. I’m going to bed.”

“Was anybody killed in the ring?”

“I don’t think so. Just badly hurt.”

“A man was killed outside in the runway.”

“Was there?” said Bill.




                                CHAPTER
                                   18


At noon we were all at the café. It was crowded. We were eating shrimps
and drinking beer. The town was crowded. Every street was full. Big
motor-cars from Biarritz and San Sebastian kept driving up and parking
around the square. They brought people for the bull-fight. Sight-seeing
cars came up, too. There was one with twenty-five Englishwomen in it.
They sat in the big, white car and looked through their glasses at the
fiesta. The dancers were all quite drunk. It was the last day of the
fiesta.

The fiesta was solid and unbroken, but the motor-cars and tourist-cars
made little islands of onlookers. When the cars emptied, the onlookers
were absorbed into the crowd. You did not see them again except as sport
clothes, odd-looking at a table among the closely packed peasants in
black smocks. The fiesta absorbed even the Biarritz English so that you
did not see them unless you passed close to a table. All the time there
was music in the street. The drums kept on pounding and the pipes were
going. Inside the cafés men with their hands gripping the table, or on
each other’s shoulders, were singing the hard-voiced singing.

“Here comes Brett,” Bill said.

I looked and saw her coming through the crowd in the square, walking,
her head up, as though the fiesta were being staged in her honor, and
she found it pleasant and amusing.

“Hello, you chaps!” she said. “I say, I _have_ a thirst.”

“Get another big beer,” Bill said to the waiter.

“Shrimps?”

“Is Cohn gone?” Brett asked.

“Yes,” Bill said. “He hired a car.”

The beer came. Brett started to lift the glass mug and her hand shook.
She saw it and smiled, and leaned forward and took a long sip.

“Good beer.”

“Very good,” I said. I was nervous about Mike. I did not think he had
slept. He must have been drinking all the time, but he seemed to be
under control.

“I heard Cohn had hurt you, Jake,” Brett said.

“No. Knocked me out. That was all.”

“I say, he did hurt Pedro Romero,” Brett said. “He hurt him most badly.”

“How is he?”

“He’ll be all right. He won’t go out of the room.”

“Does he look badly?”

“Very. He was really hurt. I told him I wanted to pop out and see you
chaps for a minute.”

“Is he going to fight?”

“Rather. I’m going with you, if you don’t mind.”

“How’s your boy friend?” Mike asked. He had not listened to anything
that Brett had said.

“Brett’s got a bull-fighter,” he said. “She had a Jew named Cohn, but he
turned out badly.”

Brett stood up.

“I am not going to listen to that sort of rot from you, Michael.”

“How’s your boy friend?”

“Damned well,” Brett said. “Watch him this afternoon.”

“Brett’s got a bull-fighter,” Mike said. “A beautiful, bloody
bull-fighter.”

“Would you mind walking over with me? I want to talk to you, Jake.”

“Tell him all about your bull-fighter,” Mike said. “Oh, to hell with
your bull-fighter!” He tipped the table so that all the beers and the
dish of shrimps went over in a crash.

“Come on,” Brett said. “Let’s get out of this.”

In the crowd crossing the square I said: “How is it?”

“I’m not going to see him after lunch until the fight. His people come
in and dress him. They’re very angry about me, he says.”

Brett was radiant. She was happy. The sun was out and the day was
bright.

“I feel altogether changed,” Brett said. “You’ve no idea, Jake.”

“Anything you want me to do?”

“No, just go to the fight with me.”

“We’ll see you at lunch?”

“No. I’m eating with him.”

We were standing under the arcade at the door of the hotel. They were
carrying tables out and setting them up under the arcade.

“Want to take a turn out to the park?” Brett asked. “I don’t want to go
up yet. I fancy he’s sleeping.”

We walked along past the theatre and out of the square and along through
the barracks of the fair, moving with the crowd between the lines of
booths. We came out on a cross-street that led to the Paseo de Sarasate.
We could see the crowd walking there, all the fashionably dressed
people. They were making the turn at the upper end of the park.

“Don’t let’s go there,” Brett said. “I don’t want staring at just now.”

We stood in the sunlight. It was hot and good after the rain and the
clouds from the sea.

“I hope the wind goes down,” Brett said. “It’s very bad for him.”

“So do I.”

“He says the bulls are all right.”

“They’re good.”

“Is that San Fermin’s?”

Brett looked at the yellow wall of the chapel.

“Yes. Where the show started on Sunday.”

“Let’s go in. Do you mind? I’d rather like to pray a little for him or
something.”

We went in through the heavy leather door that moved very lightly. It
was dark inside. Many people were praying. You saw them as your eyes
adjusted themselves to the half-light. We knelt at one of the long
wooden benches. After a little I felt Brett stiffen beside me, and saw
she was looking straight ahead.

“Come on,” she whispered throatily. “Let’s get out of here. Makes me
damned nervous.”

Outside in the hot brightness of the street Brett looked up at the
tree-tops in the wind. The praying had not been much of a success.

“Don’t know why I get so nervy in church,” Brett said. “Never does me
any good.”

We walked along.

“I’m damned bad for a religious atmosphere,” Brett said. “I’ve the wrong
type of face.

“You know,” Brett said, “I’m not worried about him at all. I just feel
happy about him.”

“Good.”

“I wish the wind would drop, though.”

“It’s liable to go down by five o’clock.”

“Let’s hope.”

“You might pray,” I laughed.

“Never does me any good. I’ve never gotten anything I prayed for. Have
you?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Oh, rot,” said Brett. “Maybe it works for some people, though. You
don’t look very religious, Jake.”

“I’m pretty religious.”

“Oh, rot,” said Brett. “Don’t start proselyting to-day. To-day’s going
to be bad enough as it is.”

It was the first time I had seen her in the old happy, careless way
since before she went off with Cohn. We were back again in front of the
hotel. All the tables were set now, and already several were filled with
people eating.

“Do look after Mike,” Brett said. “Don’t let him get too bad.”

“Your frients haff gone up-stairs,” the German maître d’hôtel said in
English. He was a continual eavesdropper. Brett turned to him:

“Thank you, so much. Have you anything else to say?”

“No, _ma’am_.”

“Good,” said Brett.

“Save us a table for three,” I said to the German. He smiled his dirty
little pink-and-white smile.

“Iss madam eating here?”

“No,” Brett said.

“Den I think a tabul for two will be enuff.”

“Don’t talk to him,” Brett said. “Mike must have been in bad shape,” she
said on the stairs. We passed Montoya on the stairs. He bowed and did
not smile.

“I’ll see you at the café,” Brett said. “Thank you, so much, Jake.”

We had stopped at the floor our rooms were on. She went straight down
the hall and into Romero’s room. She did not knock. She simply opened
the door, went in, and closed it behind her.

I stood in front of the door of Mike’s room and knocked. There was no
answer. I tried the knob and it opened. Inside the room was in great
disorder. All the bags were opened and clothing was strewn around. There
were empty bottles beside the bed. Mike lay on the bed looking like a
death mask of himself. He opened his eyes and looked at me.

“Hello, Jake,” he said very slowly. “I’m getting a lit tle sleep. I’ve
want ed a lit tle sleep for a long time.”

“Let me cover you over.”

“No. I’m quite warm.”

“Don’t go. I have n’t got ten to sleep yet.”

“You’ll sleep, Mike. Don’t worry, boy.”

“Brett’s got a bull-fighter,” Mike said. “But her Jew has gone away.”

He turned his head and looked at me.

“Damned good thing, what?”

“Yes. Now go to sleep, Mike. You ought to get some sleep.”

“I’m just start ing. I’m go ing to get a lit tle sleep.”

He shut his eyes. I went out of the room and turned the door to quietly.
Bill was in my room reading the paper.

“See Mike?”

“Yes.”

“Let’s go and eat.”

“I won’t eat down-stairs with that German head waiter. He was damned
snotty when I was getting Mike up-stairs.”

“He was snotty to us, too.”

“Let’s go out and eat in the town.”

We went down the stairs. On the stairs we passed a girl coming up with a
covered tray.

“There goes Brett’s lunch,” Bill said.

“And the kid’s,” I said.

Outside on the terrace under the arcade the German head waiter came up.
His red cheeks were shiny. He was being polite.

“I haff a tabul for two for you gentlemen,” he said.

“Go sit at it,” Bill said. We went on out across the street.

We ate at a restaurant in a side street off the square. They were all
men eating in the restaurant. It was full of smoke and drinking and
singing. The food was good and so was the wine. We did not talk much.
Afterward we went to the café and watched the fiesta come to the
boiling-point. Brett came over soon after lunch. She said she had looked
in the room and that Mike was asleep.

When the fiesta boiled over and toward the bull-ring we went with the
crowd. Brett sat at the ringside between Bill and me. Directly below us
was the callejon, the passageway between the stands and the red fence of
the barrera. Behind us the concrete stands filled solidly. Out in front,
beyond the red fence, the sand of the ring was smooth-rolled and yellow.
It looked a little heavy from the rain, but it was dry in the sun and
firm and smooth. The sword-handlers and bull-ring servants came down the
callejon carrying on their shoulders the wicker baskets of fighting
capes and muletas. They were bloodstained and compactly folded and
packed in the baskets. The sword-handlers opened the heavy leather
sword-cases so the red wrapped hilts of the sheaf of swords showed as
the leather case leaned against the fence. They unfolded the
dark-stained red flannel of the muletas and fixed batons in them to
spread the stuff and give the matador something to hold. Brett watched
it all. She was absorbed in the professional details.

“He’s his name stencilled on all the capes and muletas,” she said. “Why
do they call them muletas?”

“I don’t know.”

“I wonder if they ever launder them.”

“I don’t think so. It might spoil the color.”

“The blood must stiffen them,” Bill said.

“Funny,” Brett said. “How one doesn’t mind the blood.”

Below in the narrow passage of the callejon the sword-handlers arranged
everything. All the seats were full. Above, all the boxes were full.
There was not an empty seat except in the President’s box. When he came
in the fight would start. Across the smooth sand, in the high doorway
that led into the corrals, the bull-fighters were standing, their arms
furled in their capes, talking, waiting for the signal to march in
across the arena. Brett was watching them with the glasses.

“Here, would you like to look?”

I looked through the glasses and saw the three matadors. Romero was in
the centre, Belmonte on his left, Marcial on his right. Back of them
were their people, and behind the banderilleros, back in the passageway
and in the open space of the corral, I saw the picadors. Romero was
wearing a black suit. His tricornered hat was low down over his eyes. I
could not see his face clearly under the hat, but it looked badly
marked. He was looking straight ahead. Marcial was smoking a cigarette
guardedly, holding it in his hand. Belmonte looked ahead, his face wan
and yellow, his long wolf jaw out. He was looking at nothing. Neither he
nor Romero seemed to have anything in common with the others. They were
all alone. The President came in; there was handclapping above us in the
grand stand, and I handed the glasses to Brett. There was applause. The
music started. Brett looked through the glasses.

“Here, take them,” she said.

Through the glasses I saw Belmonte speak to Romero. Marcial straightened
up and dropped his cigarette, and, looking straight ahead, their heads
back, their free arms swinging, the three matadors walked out. Behind
them came all the procession, opening out, all striding in step, all the
capes furled, everybody with free arms swinging, and behind rode the
picadors, their pics rising like lances. Behind all came the two trains
of mules and the bull-ring servants. The matadors bowed, holding their
hats on, before the President’s box, and then came over to the barrera
below us. Pedro Romero took off his heavy gold-brocaded cape and handed
it over the fence to his sword-handler. He said something to the
sword-handler. Close below us we saw Romero’s lips were puffed, both
eyes were discolored. His face was discolored and swollen. The
sword-handler took the cape, looked up at Brett, and came over to us and
handed up the cape.

“Spread it out in front of you,” I said.

Brett leaned forward. The cape was heavy and smoothly stiff with gold.
The sword-handler looked back, shook his head, and said something. A man
beside me leaned over toward Brett.

“He doesn’t want you to spread it,” he said. “You should fold it and
keep it in your lap.”

Brett folded the heavy cape.

Romero did not look up at us. He was speaking to Belmonte. Belmonte had
sent his formal cape over to some friends. He looked across at them and
smiled, his wolf smile that was only with the mouth. Romero leaned over
the barrera and asked for the water-jug. The sword-handler brought it
and Romero poured water over the percale of his fighting-cape, and then
scuffed the lower folds in the sand with his slippered foot.

“What’s that for?” Brett asked.

“To give it weight in the wind.”

“His face looks bad,” Bill said.

“He feels very badly,” Brett said. “He should be in bed.”

The first bull was Belmonte’s. Belmonte was very good. But because he
got thirty thousand pesetas and people had stayed in line all night to
buy tickets to see him, the crowd demanded that he should be more than
very good. Belmonte’s great attraction is working close to the bull. In
bull-fighting they speak of the terrain of the bull and the terrain of
the bull-fighter. As long as a bull-fighter stays in his own terrain he
is comparatively safe. Each time he enters into the terrain of the bull
he is in great danger. Belmonte, in his best days, worked always in the
terrain of the bull. This way he gave the sensation of coming tragedy.
People went to the corrida to see Belmonte, to be given tragic
sensations, and perhaps to see the death of Belmonte. Fifteen years ago
they said if you wanted to see Belmonte you should go quickly, while he
was still alive. Since then he has killed more than a thousand bulls.
When he retired the legend grew up about how his bull-fighting had been,
and when he came out of retirement the public were disappointed because
no real man could work as close to the bulls as Belmonte was supposed to
have done, not, of course, even Belmonte.

Also Belmonte imposed conditions and insisted that his bulls should not
be too large, nor too dangerously armed with horns, and so the element
that was necessary to give the sensation of tragedy was not there, and
the public, who wanted three times as much from Belmonte, who was sick
with a fistula, as Belmonte had ever been able to give, felt defrauded
and cheated, and Belmonte’s jaw came further out in contempt, and his
face turned yellower, and he moved with greater difficulty as his pain
increased, and finally the crowd were actively against him, and he was
utterly contemptuous and indifferent. He had meant to have a great
afternoon, and instead it was an afternoon of sneers, shouted insults,
and finally a volley of cushions and pieces of bread and vegetables,
thrown down at him in the plaza where he had had his greatest triumphs.
His jaw only went further out. Sometimes he turned to smile that
toothed, long-jawed, lipless smile when he was called something
particularly insulting, and always the pain that any movement produced
grew stronger and stronger, until finally his yellow face was parchment
color, and after his second bull was dead and the throwing of bread and
cushions was over, after he had saluted the President with the same
wolf-jawed smile and contemptuous eyes, and handed his sword over the
barrera to be wiped, and put back in its case, he passed through into
the callejon and leaned on the barrera below us, his head on his arms,
not seeing, not hearing anything, only going through his pain. When he
looked up, finally, he asked for a drink of water. He swallowed a
little, rinsed his mouth, spat the water, took his cape, and went back
into the ring.

Because they were against Belmonte the public were for Romero. From the
moment he left the barrera and went toward the bull they applauded him.
Belmonte watched Romero, too, watched him always without seeming to. He
paid no attention to Marcial. Marcial was the sort of thing he knew all
about. He had come out of retirement to compete with Marcial, knowing it
was a competition gained in advance. He had expected to compete with
Marcial and the other stars of the decadence of bull-fighting, and he
knew that the sincerity of his own bull-fighting would be so set off by
the false æsthetics of the bull-fighters of the decadent period that he
would only have to be in the ring. His return from retirement had been
spoiled by Romero. Romero did always, smoothly, calmly, and beautifully,
what he, Belmonte, could only bring himself to do now sometimes. The
crowd felt it, even the people from Biarritz, even the American
ambassador saw it, finally. It was a competition that Belmonte would not
enter because it would lead only to a bad horn wound or death. Belmonte
was no longer well enough. He no longer had his greatest moments in the
bull-ring. He was not sure that there were any great moments. Things
were not the same and now life only came in flashes. He had flashes of
the old greatness with his bulls, but they were not of value because he
had discounted them in advance when he had picked the bulls out for
their safety, getting out of a motor and leaning on a fence, looking
over at the herd on the ranch of his friend the bull-breeder. So he had
two small, manageable bulls without much horns, and when he felt the
greatness again coming, just a little of it through the pain that was
always with him, it had been discounted and sold in advance, and it did
not give him a good feeling. It was the greatness, but it did not make
bull-fighting wonderful to him any more.

Pedro Romero had the greatness. He loved bull-fighting, and I think he
loved the bulls, and I think he loved Brett. Everything of which he
could control the locality he did in front of her all that afternoon.
Never once did he look up. He made it stronger that way, and did it for
himself, too, as well as for her. Because he did not look up to ask if
it pleased he did it all for himself inside, and it strengthened him,
and yet he did it for her, too. But he did not do it for her at any loss
to himself. He gained by it all through the afternoon.

His first “quite” was directly below us. The three matadors take the
bull in turn after each charge he makes at a picador. Belmonte was the
first. Marcial was the second. Then came Romero. The three of them were
standing at the left of the horse. The picador, his hat down over his
eyes, the shaft of his pic angling sharply toward the bull, kicked in
the spurs and held them and with the reins in his left hand walked the
horse forward toward the bull. The bull was watching. Seemingly he
watched the white horse, but really he watched the triangular steel
point of the pic. Romero, watching, saw the bull start to turn his head.
He did not want to charge. Romero flicked his cape so the color caught
the bull’s eye. The bull charged with the reflex, charged, and found not
the flash of color but a white horse, and a man leaned far over the
horse, shot the steel point of the long hickory shaft into the hump of
muscle on the bull’s shoulder, and pulled his horse sideways as he
pivoted on the pic, making a wound, enforcing the iron into the bull’s
shoulder, making him bleed for Belmonte.

The bull did not insist under the iron. He did not really want to get at
the horse. He turned and the group broke apart and Romero was taking him
out with his cape. He took him out softly and smoothly, and then stopped
and, standing squarely in front of the bull, offered him the cape. The
bull’s tail went up and he charged, and Romero moved his arms ahead of
the bull, wheeling, his feet firmed. The dampened, mud-weighted cape
swung open and full as a sail fills, and Romero pivoted with it just
ahead of the bull. At the end of the pass they were facing each other
again. Romero smiled. The bull wanted it again, and Romero’s cape filled
again, this time on the other side. Each time he let the bull pass so
close that the man and the bull and the cape that filled and pivoted
ahead of the bull were all one sharply etched mass. It was all so slow
and so controlled. It was as though he were rocking the bull to sleep.
He made four veronicas like that, and finished with a half-veronica that
turned his back on the bull and came away toward the applause, his hand
on his hip, his cape on his arm, and the bull watching his back going
away.

In his own bulls he was perfect. His first bull did not see well. After
the first two passes with the cape Romero knew exactly how bad the
vision was impaired. He worked accordingly. It was not brilliant
bull-fighting. It was only perfect bull-fighting. The crowd wanted the
bull changed. They made a great row. Nothing very fine could happen with
a bull that could not see the lures, but the President would not order
him replaced.

“Why don’t they change him?” Brett asked.

“They’ve paid for him. They don’t want to lose their money.”

“It’s hardly fair to Romero.”

“Watch how he handles a bull that can’t see the color.”

“It’s the sort of thing I don’t like to see.”

It was not nice to watch if you cared anything about the person who was
doing it. With the bull who could not see the colors of the capes, or
the scarlet flannel of the muleta, Romero had to make the bull consent
with his body. He had to get so close that the bull saw his body, and
would start for it, and then shift the bull’s charge to the flannel and
finish out the pass in the classic manner. The Biarritz crowd did not
like it They thought Romero was afraid, and that was why he gave that
little sidestep each time as he transferred the bull’s charge from his
own body to the flannel. They preferred Belmonte’s imitation of himself
or Marcial’s imitation of Belmonte. There were three of them in the row
behind us.

“What’s he afraid of the bull for? The bull’s so dumb he only goes after
the cloth.”

“He’s just a young bull-fighter. He hasn’t learned it yet.”

“But I thought he was fine with the cape before.”

“Probably he’s nervous now.”

Out in the centre of the ring, all alone, Romero was going on with the
same thing, getting so close that the bull could see him plainly,
offering the body, offering it again a little closer, the bull watching
dully, then so close that the bull thought he had him, offering again
and finally drawing the charge and then, just before the horns came,
giving the bull the red cloth to follow with at little, almost
imperceptible, jerk that so offended the critical judgment of the
Biarritz bull-fight experts.

“He’s going to kill now,” I said to Brett. “The bull’s still strong. He
wouldn’t wear himself out.”

Out in the centre of the ring Romero profiled in front of the bull, drew
the sword out from the folds of the muleta, rose on his toes, and
sighted along the blade. The bull charged as Romero charged. Romero’s
left hand dropped the muleta over the bull’s muzzle to blind him, his
left shoulder went forward between the horns as the sword went in, and
for just an instant he and the bull were one, Romero way out over the
bull, the right arm extended high up to where the hilt of the sword had
gone in between the bull’s shoulders. Then the figure was broken. There
was a little jolt as Romero came clear, and then he was standing, one
hand up, facing the bull, his shirt ripped out from under his sleeve,
the white blowing in the wind, and the bull, the red sword hilt tight
between his shoulders, his head going down and his legs settling.

“There he goes,” Bill said.

Romero was close enough so the bull could see him. His hand still up, he
spoke to the bull. The bull gathered himself, then his head went forward
and he went over slowly, then all over, suddenly, four feet in the air.

They handed the sword to Romero, and carrying it blade down, the muleta
in his other hand, he walked over to in front of the President’s box,
bowed, straightened, and came over to the barrera and handed over the
sword and muleta.

“Bad one,” said the sword-handler.

“He made me sweat,” said Romero. He wiped off his face. The
sword-handler handed him the water-jug. Romero wiped his lips. It hurt
him to drink out of the jug. He did not look up at us.

Marcial had a big day. They were still applauding him when Romero’s last
bull came in. It was the bull that had sprinted out and killed the man
in the morning running.

During Romero’s first bull his hurt face had been very noticeable.
Everything he did showed it. All the concentration of the awkwardly
delicate working with the bull that could not see well brought it out.
The fight with Cohn had not touched his spirit but his face had been
smashed and his body hurt. He was wiping all that out now. Each thing
that he did with this bull wiped that out a little cleaner. It was a
good bull, a big bull, and with horns, and it turned and recharged
easily and surely. He was what Romero wanted in bulls.

When he had finished his work with the muleta and was ready to kill, the
crowd made him go on. They did not want the bull killed yet, they did
not want it to be over. Romero went on. It was like a course in
bull-fighting. All the passes he linked up, all completed, all slow,
templed and smooth. There were no tricks and no mystifications. There
was no brusqueness. And each pass as it reached the summit gave you a
sudden ache inside. The crowd did not want it ever to be finished.

The bull was squared on all four feet to be killed, and Romero killed
directly below us. He killed not as he had been forced to by the last
bull, but as he wanted to. He profiled directly in front of the bull,
drew the sword out of the folds of the muleta and sighted along the
blade. The bull watched him. Romero spoke to the bull and tapped one of
his feet. The bull charged and Romero waited for the charge, the muleta
held low, sighting along the blade, his feet firm. Then without taking a
step forward, he became one with the bull, the sword was in high between
the shoulders, the bull had followed the low-swung flannel, that
disappeared as Romero lurched clear to the left, and it was over. The
bull tried to go forward, his legs commenced to settle, he swung from
side to side, hesitated, then went down on his knees, and Romero’s older
brother leaned forward behind him and drove a short knife into the
bull’s neck at the base of the horns. The first time he missed. He drove
the knife in again, and the bull went over, twitching and rigid.
Romero’s brother, holding the bull’s horn in one hand, the knife in the
other, looked up at the President’s box. Handkerchiefs were waving all
over the bull-ring. The President looked down from the box and waved his
handkerchief. The brother cut the notched black ear from the dead bull
and trotted over with it to Romero. The bull lay heavy and black on the
sand, his tongue out. Boys were running toward him from all parts of the
arena, making a little circle around him. They were starting to dance
around the bull.

Romero took the ear from his brother and held it up toward the
President. The President bowed and Romero, running to get ahead of the
crowd, came toward us. He leaned up against the barrera and gave the ear
to Brett. He nodded his head and smiled. The crowd were all about him.
Brett held down the cape.

“You liked it?” Romero called.

Brett did not say anything. They looked at each other and smiled. Brett
had the ear in her hand.

“Don’t get bloody,” Romero said, and grinned. The crowd wanted him.
Several boys shouted at Brett. The crowd was the boys, the dancers, and
the drunks. Romero turned and tried to get through the crowd. They were
all around him trying to lift him and put him on their shoulders. He
fought and twisted away, and started running, in the midst of them,
toward the exit. He did not want to be carried on people’s shoulders.
But they held him and lifted him. It was uncomfortable and his legs were
spraddled and his body was very sore. They were lifting him and all
running toward the gate. He had his hand on somebody’s shoulder. He
looked around at us apologetically. The crowd, running, went out the
gate with him.

We all three went back to the hotel. Brett went up-stairs. Bill and I
sat in the down-stairs dining-room and ate some hard-boiled eggs and
drank several bottles of beer. Belmonte came down in his street clothes
with his manager and two other men. They sat at the next table and ate.
Belmonte ate very little. They were leaving on the seven o’clock train
for Barcelona. Belmonte wore a blue-striped shirt and a dark suit, and
ate soft-boiled eggs. The others ate a big meal. Belmonte did not talk.
He only answered questions.

Bill was tired after the bull-fight. So was I. We both took a bull-fight
very hard. We sat and ate the eggs and I watched Belmonte and the people
at his table. The men with him were tough-looking and businesslike.

“Come on over to the café,” Bill said. “I want an absinthe.”

It was the last day of the fiesta. Outside it was beginning to be cloudy
again. The square was full of people and the fireworks experts were
making up their set pieces for the night and covering them over with
beech branches. Boys were watching. We passed stands of rockets with
long bamboo stems. Outside the café there was a great crowd. The music
and the dancing were going on. The giants and the dwarfs were passing.

“Where’s Edna?” I asked Bill.

“I don’t know.”

We watched the beginning of the evening of the last night of the fiesta.
The absinthe made everything seem better. I drank it without sugar in
the dripping glass, and it was pleasantly bitter.

“I feel sorry about Cohn,” Bill said. “He had an awful time.”

“Oh, to hell with Cohn,” I said.

“Where do you suppose he went?”

“Up to Paris.”

“What do you suppose he’ll do?”

“Oh, to hell with him.”

“What do you suppose he’ll do?”

“Pick up with his old girl, probably.”

“Who was his old girl?”

“Somebody named Frances.”

We had another absinthe.

“When do you go back?” I asked.

“To-morrow.”

After a little while Bill said: “Well, it was a swell fiesta.”

“Yes,” I said; “something doing all the time.”

“You wouldn’t believe it. It’s like a wonderful nightmare.”

“Sure,” I said. “I’d believe anything. Including nightmares.”

“What’s the matter? Feel low?”

“Low as hell.”

“Have another absinthe. Here, waiter! Another absinthe for this señor.”

“I feel like hell,” I said.

“Drink that,” said Bill. “Drink it slow.”

It was beginning to get dark. The fiesta was going on. I began to feel
drunk but I did not feel any better.

“How do you feel?”

“I feel like hell.”

“Have another?”

“It won’t do any good.”

“Try it. You can’t tell; maybe this is the one that gets it. Hey,
waiter! Another absinthe for this señor!”

I poured the water directly into it and stirred it instead of letting it
drip. Bill put in a lump of ice. I stirred the ice around with a spoon
in the brownish, cloudy mixture.

“How is it?”

“Fine.”

“Don’t drink it fast that way. It will make you sick.”

I set down the glass. I had not meant to drink it fast.

“I feel tight.”

“You ought to.”

“That’s what you wanted, wasn’t it?”

“Sure. Get tight. Get over your damn depression.”

“Well, I’m tight. Is that what you want?”

“Sit down.”

“I won’t sit down,” I said. “I’m going over to the hotel.”

I was very drunk. I was drunker than I ever remembered having been. At
the hotel I went up-stairs. Brett’s door was open. I put my head in the
room. Mike was sitting on the bed. He waved a bottle.

“Jake,” he said. “Come in, Jake.”

I went in and sat down. The room was unstable unless I looked at some
fixed point.

“Brett, you know. She’s gone off with the bull-fighter chap.”

“No.”

“Yes. She looked for you to say good-bye. They went on the seven o’clock
train.”

“Did they?”

“Bad thing to do,” Mike said. “She shouldn’t have done it.”

“No.”

“Have a drink? Wait while I ring for some beer.”

“I’m drunk,” I said. “I’m going in and lie down.”

“Are you blind? I was blind myself.”

“Yes,” I said, “I’m blind.”

“Well, bung-o,” Mike said. “Get some sleep, old Jake.”

I went out the door and into my own room and lay on the bed. The bed
went sailing off and I sat up in bed and looked at the wall to make it
stop. Outside in the square the fiesta was going on. It did not mean
anything. Later Bill and Mike came in to get me to go down and eat with
them. I pretended to be asleep.

“He’s asleep. Better let him alone.”

“He’s blind as a tick,” Mike said. They went out.

I got up and went to the balcony and looked out at the dancing in the
square. The world was not wheeling any more. It was just very clear and
bright, and inclined to blur at the edges. I washed, brushed my hair. I
looked strange to myself in the glass, and went down-stairs to the
dining-room.

“Here he is!” said Bill. “Good old Jake! I knew you wouldn’t pass out.”

“Hello, you old drunk,” Mike said.

“I got hungry and woke up.”

“Eat some soup,” Bill said.

The three of us sat at the table, and it seemed as though about six
people were missing.




                                BOOK III




                                CHAPTER
                                   19


In the morning it was all over. The fiesta was finished. I woke about
nine o’clock, had a bath, dressed, and went down-stairs. The square was
empty and there were no people on the streets. A few children were
picking up rocket-sticks in the square. The cafés were just opening and
the waiters were carrying out the comfortable white wicker chairs and
arranging them around the marble-topped tables in the shade of the
arcade. They were sweeping the streets and sprinkling them with a hose.

I sat in one of the wicker chairs and leaned back comfortably. The
waiter was in no hurry to come. The white-paper announcements of the
unloading of the bulls and the big schedules of special trains were
still up on the pillars of the arcade. A waiter wearing a blue apron
came out with a bucket of water and a cloth, and commenced to tear down
the notices, pulling the paper off in strips and washing and rubbing
away the paper that stuck to the stone. The fiesta was over.

I drank a coffee and after a while Bill came over. I watched him come
walking across the square. He sat down at the table and ordered a
coffee.

“Well,” he said, “it’s all over.”

“Yes,” I said. “When do you go?”

“I don’t know. We better get a car, I think. Aren’t you going back to
Paris?”

“No. I can stay away another week. I think I’ll go to San Sebastian.”

“I want to get back.”

“What’s Mike going to do?”

“He’s going to Saint Jean de Luz.”

“Let’s get a car and all go as far as Bayonne. You can get the train up
from there to-night.”

“Good. Let’s go after lunch.”

“All right. I’ll get the car.”

We had lunch and paid the bill. Montoya did not come near us. One of the
maids brought the bill. The car was outside. The chauffeur piled and
strapped the bags on top of the car and put them in beside him in the
front seat and we got in. The car went out of the square, along through
the side streets, out under the trees and down the hill and away from
Pamplona. It did not seem like a very long ride. Mike had a bottle of
Fundador. I only took a couple of drinks. We came over the mountains and
out of Spain and down the white roads and through the overfoliaged, wet,
green, Basque country, and finally into Bayonne. We left Bill’s baggage
at the station, and he bought a ticket to Paris. His train left at
seven-ten. We came out of the station. The car was standing out in
front.

“What shall we do about the car?” Bill asked.

“Oh, bother the car,” Mike said. “Let’s just keep the car with us.”

“All right,” Bill said. “Where shall we go?”

“Let’s go to Biarritz and have a drink.”

“Old Mike the spender,” Bill said.

We drove in to Biarritz and left the car outside a very Ritz place. We
went into the bar and sat on high stools and drank a whiskey and soda.

“That drink’s mine,” Mike said.

“Let’s roll for it.”

So we rolled poker dice out of a deep leather dice-cup. Bill was out
first roll. Mike lost to me and handed the bartender a hundred-franc
note. The whiskeys were twelve francs apiece. We had another round and
Mike lost again. Each time he gave the bartender a good tip. In a room
off the bar there was a good jazz band playing. It was a pleasant bar.
We had another round. I went out on the first roll with four kings. Bill
and Mike rolled. Mike won the first roll with four jacks. Bill won the
second. On the final roll Mike had three kings and let them stay. He
handed the dice-cup to Bill. Bill rattled them and rolled, and there
were three kings, an ace, and a queen.

“It’s yours, Mike,” Bill said. “Old Mike, the gambler.”

“I’m so sorry,” Mike said. “I can’t get it.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I’ve no money,” Mike said. “I’m stony. I’ve just twenty francs. Here,
take twenty francs.”

Bill’s face sort of changed.

“I just had enough to pay Montoya. Damned lucky to have it, too.”

“I’ll cash you a check,” Bill said.

“That’s damned nice of you, but you see I can’t write checks.”

“What are you going to do for money?”

“Oh, some will come through. I’ve two weeks allowance should be here. I
can live on tick at this pub in Saint Jean.”

“What do you want to do about the car?” Bill asked me. “Do you want to
keep it on?”

“It doesn’t make any difference. Seems sort of idiotic.”

“Come on, let’s have another drink,” Mike said.

“Fine. This one is on me,” Bill said. “Has Brett any money?” He turned
to Mike.

“I shouldn’t think so. She put up most of what I gave to old Montoya.”

“She hasn’t any money with her?” I asked.

“I shouldn’t think so. She never has any money. She gets five hundred
quid a year and pays three hundred and fifty of it in interest to Jews.”

“I suppose they get it at the source,” said Bill.

“Quite. They’re not really Jews. We just call them Jews. They’re
Scotsmen, I believe.”

“Hasn’t she any at all with her?” I asked.

“I hardly think so. She gave it all to me when she left.”

“Well,” Bill said, “we might as well have another drink.”

“Damned good idea,” Mike said. “One never gets anywhere by discussing
finances.”

“No,” said Bill. Bill and I rolled for the next two rounds. Bill lost
and paid. We went out to the car.

“Anywhere you’d like to go, Mike?” Bill asked.

“Let’s take a drive. It might do my credit good. Let’s drive about a
little.”

“Fine. I’d like to see the coast. Let’s drive down toward Hendaye.”

“I haven’t any credit along the coast.”

“You can’t ever tell,” said Bill.

We drove out along the coast road. There was the green of the headlands,
the white, red-roofed villas, patches of forest, and the ocean very blue
with the tide out and the water curling far out along the beach. We
drove through Saint Jean de Luz and passed through villages farther down
the coast. Back of the rolling country we were going through we saw the
mountains we had come over from Pamplona. The road went on ahead. Bill
looked at his watch. It was time for us to go back. He knocked on the
glass and told the driver to turn around. The driver backed the car out
into the grass to turn it. In back of us were the woods, below a stretch
of meadow, then the sea.

At the hotel where Mike was going to stay in Saint Jean we stopped the
car and he got out. The chauffeur carried in his bags. Mike stood by the
side of the car.

“Good-bye, you chaps,” Mike said. “It was a damned fine fiesta.”

“So long, Mike,” Bill said.

“I’ll see you around,” I said.

“Don’t worry about money,” Mike said. “You can pay for the car, Jake,
and I’ll send you my share.”

“So long, Mike.”

“So long, you chaps. You’ve been damned nice.”

We all shook hands. We waved from the car to Mike. He stood in the road
watching. We got to Bayonne just before the train left. A porter carried
Bill’s bags in from the consigne. I went as far as the inner gate to the
tracks.

“So long, fella,” Bill said.

“So long, kid!”

“It was swell. I’ve had a swell time.”

“Will you be in Paris?”

“No, I have to sail on the 17th. So long, fella!”

“So long, old kid!”

He went in through the gate to the train. The porter went ahead with the
bags. I watched the train pull out. Bill was at one of the windows. The
window passed, the rest of the train passed, and the tracks were empty.
I went outside to the car.

“How much do we owe you?” I asked the driver. The price to Bayonne had
been fixed at a hundred and fifty pesetas.

“Two hundred pesetas.”

“How much more will it be if you drive me to San Sebastian on your way
back?”

“Fifty pesetas.”

“Don’t kid me.”

“Thirty-five pesetas.”

“It’s not worth it,” I said. “Drive me to the Hotel Panier Fleuri.”

At the hotel I paid the driver and gave him a tip. The car was powdered
with dust. I rubbed the rod-case through the dust. It seemed the last
thing that connected me with Spain and the fiesta. The driver put the
car in gear and went down the street. I watched it turn off to take the
road to Spain. I went into the hotel and they gave me a room. It was the
same room I had slept in when Bill and Cohn and I were in Bayonne. That
seemed a very long time ago. I washed, changed my shirt, and went out in
the town.

At a newspaper kiosque I bought a copy of the New York _Herald_ and sat
in a café to read it. It felt strange to be in France again. There was a
safe, suburban feeling. I wished I had gone up to Paris with Bill,
except that Paris would have meant more fiesta-ing. I was through with
fiestas for a while. It would be quiet in San Sebastian. The season does
not open there until August. I could get a good hotel room and read and
swim. There was a fine beach there. There were wonderful trees along the
promenade above the beach, and there were many children sent down with
their nurses before the season opened. In the evening there would be
band concerts under the trees across from the Café Marinas. I could sit
in the Marinas and listen.

“How does one eat inside?” I asked the waiter. Inside the café was a
restaurant.

“Well. Very well. One eats very well.”

“Good.”

I went in and ate dinner. It was a big meal for France but it seemed
very carefully apportioned after Spain. I drank a bottle of wine for
company. It was a Château Margaux. It was pleasant to be drinking slowly
and to be tasting the wine and to be drinking alone. A bottle of wine
was good company. Afterward I had coffee. The waiter recommended a
Basque liqueur called Izzarra. He brought in the bottle and poured a
liqueur-glass full. He said Izzarra was made of the flowers of the
Pyrenees. The veritable flowers of the Pyrenees. It looked like hair-oil
and smelled like Italian _strega_. I told him to take the flowers of the
Pyrenees away and bring me a _vieux marc_. The _marc_ was good. I had a
second _marc_ after the coffee.

The waiter seemed a little offended about the flowers of the Pyrenees,
so I overtipped him. That made him happy. It felt comfortable to be in a
country where it is so simple to make people happy. You can never tell
whether a Spanish waiter will thank you. Everything is on such a clear
financial basis in France. It is the simplest country to live in. No one
makes things complicated by becoming your friend for any obscure reason.
If you want people to like you you have only to spend a little money. I
spent a little money and the waiter liked me. He appreciated my valuable
qualities. He would be glad to see me back. I would dine there again
some time and he would be glad to see me, and would want me at his
table. It would be a sincere liking because it would have a sound basis.
I was back in France.

Next morning I tipped every one a little too much at the hotel to make
more friends, and left on the morning train for San Sebastian. At the
station I did not tip the porter more than I should because I did not
think I would ever see him again. I only wanted a few good French
friends in Bayonne to make me welcome in case I should come back there
again. I knew that if they remembered me their friendship would be
loyal.

At Irun we had to change trains and show passports. I hated to leave
France. Life was so simple in France. I felt I was a fool to be going
back into Spain. In Spain you could not tell about anything. I felt like
a fool to be going back into it, but I stood in line with my passport,
opened my bags for the customs, bought a ticket, went through a gate,
climbed onto the train, and after forty minutes and eight tunnels I was
at San Sebastian.

Even on a hot day San Sebastian has a certain early-morning quality. The
trees seem as though their leaves were never quite dry. The streets feel
as though they had just been sprinkled. It is always cool and shady on
certain streets on the hottest day. I went to a hotel in the town where
I had stopped before, and they gave me a room with a balcony that opened
out above the roofs of the town. There was a green mountainside beyond
the roofs.

I unpacked my bags and stacked my books on the table beside the head of
the bed, put out my shaving things, hung up some clothes in the big
armoire, and made up a bundle for the laundry. Then I took a shower in
the bathroom and went down to lunch. Spain had not changed to
summer-time, so I was early. I set my watch again. I had recovered an
hour by coming to San Sebastian.

As I went into the dining-room the concierge brought me a police
bulletin to fill out. I signed it and asked him for two telegraph forms,
and wrote a message to the Hotel Montoya, telling them to forward all
mail and telegrams for me to this address. I calculated how many days I
would be in San Sebastian and then wrote out a wire to the office asking
them to hold mail, but forward all wires for me to San Sebastian for six
days. Then I went in and had lunch.

After lunch I went up to my room, read a while, and went to sleep. When
I woke it was half past four. I found my swimming-suit, wrapped it with
a comb in a towel, and went down-stairs and walked up the street to the
Concha. The tide was about half-way out. The beach was smooth and firm,
and the sand yellow. I went into a bathing-cabin, undressed, put on my
suit, and walked across the smooth sand to the sea. The sand was warm
under bare feet. There were quite a few people in the water and on the
beach. Out beyond where the headlands of the Concha almost met to form
the harbor there was a white line of breakers and the open sea. Although
the tide was going out, there were a few slow rollers. They came in like
undulations in the water, gathered weight of water, and then broke
smoothly on the warm sand. I waded out. The water was cold. As a roller
came I dove, swam out under water, and came to the surface with all the
chill gone. I swam out to the raft, pulled myself up, and lay on the hot
planks. A boy and girl were at the other end. The girl had undone the
top strap of her bathing-suit and was browning her back. The boy lay
face downward on the raft and talked to her. She laughed at things he
said, and turned her brown back in the sun. I lay on the raft in the sun
until I was dry. Then I tried several dives. I dove deep once, swimming
down to the bottom. I swam with my eyes open and it was green and dark.
The raft made a dark shadow. I came out of water beside the raft, pulled
up, dove once more, holding it for length, and then swam ashore. I lay
on the beach until I was dry, then went into the bathing-cabin, took off
my suit, sloshed myself with fresh water, and rubbed dry.

I walked around the harbor under the trees to the casino, and then up
one of the cool streets to the Café Marinas. There was an orchestra
playing inside the café and I sat out on the terrace and enjoyed the
fresh coolness in the hot day, and had a glass of lemon-juice and shaved
ice and then a long whiskey and soda. I sat in front of the Marinas for
a long time and read and watched the people, and listened to the music.

Later when it began to get dark, I walked around the harbor and out
along the promenade, and finally back to the hotel for supper. There was
a bicycle-race on, the Tour du Pays Basque, and the riders were stopping
that night in San Sebastian. In the dining-room, at one side, there was
a long table of bicycle-riders, eating with their trainers and managers.
They were all French and Belgians, and paid close attention to their
meal, but they were having a good time. At the head of the table were
two good-looking French girls, with much Rue du Faubourg Montmartre
chic. I could not make out whom they belonged to. They all spoke in
slang at the long table and there were many private jokes and some jokes
at the far end that were not repeated when the girls asked to hear them.
The next morning at five o’clock the race resumed with the last lap, San
Sebastian-Bilbao. The bicycle-riders drank much wine, and were burned
and browned by the sun. They did not take the race seriously except
among themselves. They had raced among themselves so often that it did
not make much difference who won. Especially in a foreign country. The
money could be arranged.

The man who had a matter of two minutes lead in the race had an attack
of boils, which were very painful. He sat on the small of his back. His
neck was very red and the blond hairs were sunburned. The other riders
joked him about his boils. He tapped on the table with his fork.

“Listen,” he said, “to-morrow my nose is so tight on the handle-bars
that the only thing touches those boils is a lovely breeze.”

One of the girls looked at him down the table, and he grinned and turned
red. The Spaniards, they said, did not know how to pedal.

I had coffee out on the terrasse with the team manager of one of the big
bicycle manufacturers. He said it had been a very pleasant race, and
would have been worth watching if Bottechia had not abandoned it at
Pamplona. The dust had been bad, but in Spain the roads were better than
in France. Bicycle road-racing was the only sport in the world, he said.
Had I ever followed the Tour de France? Only in the papers. The Tour de
France was the greatest sporting event in the world. Following and
organizing the road races had made him know France. Few people know
France. All spring and all summer and all fall he spent on the road with
bicycle road-racers. Look at the number of motor-cars now that followed
the riders from town to town in a road race. It was a rich country and
more _sportif_ every year. It would be the most _sportif_ country in the
world. It was bicycle road-racing did it. That and football. He knew
France. _La France Sportive._ He knew road-racing. We had a cognac.
After all, though, it wasn’t bad to get back to Paris. There is only one
Paname. In all the world, that is. Paris is the town the most _sportif_
in the world. Did I know the _Chope de Negre_? Did I not. I would see
him there some time. I certainly would. We would drink another _fine_
together. We certainly would. They started at six o’clock less a quarter
in the morning. Would I be up for the depart? I would certainly try to.
Would I like him to call me? It was very interesting. I would leave a
call at the desk. He would not mind calling me. I could not let him take
the trouble. I would leave a call at the desk. We said good-bye until
the next morning.

In the morning when I awoke the bicycle-riders and their following cars
had been on the road for three hours. I had coffee and the papers in bed
and then dressed and took my bathing-suit down to the beach. Everything
was fresh and cool and damp in the early morning. Nurses in uniform and
in peasant costume walked under the trees with children. The Spanish
children were beautiful. Some bootblacks sat together under a tree
talking to a soldier. The soldier had only one arm. The tide was in and
there was a good breeze and a surf on the beach.

I undressed in one of the bath-cabins, crossed the narrow line of beach
and went into the water. I swam out, trying to swim through the rollers,
but having to dive sometimes. Then in the quiet water I turned and
floated. Floating I saw only the sky, and felt the drop and lift of the
swells. I swam back to the surf and coasted in, face down, on a big
roller, then turned and swam, trying to keep in the trough and not have
a wave break over me. It made me tired, swimming in the trough, and I
turned and swam out to the raft. The water was buoyant and cold. It felt
as though you could never sink. I swam slowly, it seemed like a long
swim with the high tide, and then pulled up on the raft and sat,
dripping, on the boards that were becoming hot in the sun. I looked
around at the bay, the old town, the casino, the line of trees along the
promenade, and the big hotels with their white porches and gold-lettered
names. Off on the right, almost closing the harbor, was a green hill
with a castle. The raft rocked with the motion of the water. On the
other side of the narrow gap that led into the open sea was another high
headland. I thought I would like to swim across the bay but I was afraid
of cramp.

I sat in the sun and watched the bathers on the beach. They looked very
small. After a while I stood up, gripped with my toes on the edge of the
raft as it tipped with my weight, and dove cleanly and deeply, to come
up through the lightening water, blew the salt water out of my head, and
swam slowly and steadily in to shore.

After I was dressed and had paid for the bath-cabin, I walked back to
the hotel. The bicycle-racers had left several copies of _L’Auto_
around, and I gathered them up in the reading-room and took them out and
sat in an easy chair in the sun to read about and catch up on French
sporting life. While I was sitting there the concierge came out with a
blue envelope in his hand.

“A telegram for you, sir.”

I poked my finger along under the fold that was fastened down, spread it
open, and read it. It had been forwarded from Paris:

                  COULD YOU COME HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
                  AM RATHER IN TROUBLE BRETT.

I tipped the concierge and read the message again. A postman was coming
along the sidewalk. He turned in the hotel. He had a big moustache and
looked very military. He came out of the hotel again. The concierge was
just behind him.

“Here’s another telegram for you, sir.”

“Thank you,” I said.

I opened it. It was forwarded from Pamplona.

                  COULD YOU COME HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
                  AM RATHER IN TROUBLE BRETT.

The concierge stood there waiting for another tip, probably.

“What time is there a train for Madrid?”

“It left at nine this morning. There is a slow train at eleven, and the
Sud Express at ten to-night.”

“Get me a berth on the Sud Express. Do you want the money now?”

“Just as you wish,” he said. “I will have it put on the bill.”

“Do that.”

Well, that meant San Sebastian all shot to hell. I suppose, vaguely, I
had expected something of the sort. I saw the concierge standing in the
doorway.

“Bring me a telegram form, please.”

He brought it and I took out my fountain-pen and printed:

                   LADY ASHLEY HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
                   ARRIVING SUD EXPRESS TOMORROW LOVE
                   JAKE.

That seemed to handle it. That was it. Send a girl off with one man.
Introduce her to another to go off with him. Now go and bring her back.
And sign the wire with love. That was it all right. I went in to lunch.

I did not sleep much that night on the Sud Express. In the morning I had
breakfast in the dining-car and watched the rock and pine country
between Avila and Escorial. I saw the Escorial out of the window, gray
and long and cold in the sun, and did not give a damn about it. I saw
Madrid come up over the plain, a compact white sky-line on the top of a
little cliff away off across the sun-hardened country.

The Norte station in Madrid is the end of the line. All trains finish
there. They don’t go on anywhere. Outside were cabs and taxis and a line
of hotel runners. It was like a country town. I took a taxi and we
climbed up through the gardens, by the empty palace and the unfinished
church on the edge of the cliff, and on up until we were in the high,
hot, modern town. The taxi coasted down a smooth street to the Puerta
del Sol, and then through the traffic and out into the Carrera San
Jeronimo. All the shops had their awnings down against the heat. The
windows on the sunny side of the street were shuttered. The taxi stopped
at the curb. I saw the sign HOTEL MONTANA on the second floor. The
taxi-driver carried the bags in and left them by the elevator. I could
not make the elevator work, so I walked up. On the second floor up was a
cut brass sign: HOTEL MONTANA. I rang and no one came to the door. I
rang again and a maid with a sullen face opened the door.

“Is Lady Ashley here?” I asked.

She looked at me dully.

“Is an Englishwoman here?”

She turned and called some one inside. A very fat woman came to the
door. Her hair was gray and stiffly oiled in scallops around her face.
She was short and commanding.

“Muy buenos,” I said. “Is there an Englishwoman here? I would like to
see this English lady.”

“Muy buenos. Yes, there is a female English. Certainly you can see her
if she wishes to see you.”

“She wishes to see me.”

“The chica will ask her.”

“It is very hot.”

“It is very hot in the summer in Madrid.”

“And how cold in winter.”

“Yes, it is very cold in winter.”

Did I want to stay myself in person in the Hotel Montana?

Of that as yet I was undecided, but it would give me pleasure if my bags
were brought up from the ground floor in order that they might not be
stolen. Nothing was ever stolen in the Hotel Montana. In other fondas,
yes. Not here. No. The personages of this establishment were rigidly
selectioned. I was happy to hear it. Nevertheless I would welcome the
upbringal of my bags.

The maid came in and said that the female English wanted to see the male
English now, at once.

“Good,” I said. “You see. It is as I said.”

“Clearly.”

I followed the maid’s back down a long, dark corridor. At the end she
knocked on a door.

“Hello,” said Brett. “Is it you, Jake?”

“It’s me.”

“Come in. Come in.”

I opened the door. The maid closed it after me. Brett was in bed. She
had just been brushing her hair and held the brush in her hand. The room
was in that disorder produced only by those who have always had
servants.

“Darling!” Brett said.

I went over to the bed and put my arms around her. She kissed me, and
while she kissed me I could feel she was thinking of something else. She
was trembling in my arms. She felt very small.

“Darling! I’ve had such a hell of a time.”

“Tell me about it.”

“Nothing to tell. He only left yesterday. I made him go.”

“Why didn’t you keep him?”

“I don’t know. It isn’t the sort of thing one does. I don’t think I hurt
him any.”

“You were probably damn good for him.”

“He shouldn’t be living with any one. I realized that right away.”

“No.”

“Oh, hell!” she said, “let’s not talk about it. Let’s never talk about
it.”

“All right.”

“It was rather a knock his being ashamed of me. He was ashamed of me for
a while, you know.”

“No.”

“Oh, yes. They ragged him about me at the café, I guess. He wanted me to
grow my hair out. Me, with long hair. I’d look so like hell.”

“It’s funny.”

“He said it would make me more womanly. I’d look a fright.”

“What happened?”

“Oh, he got over that. He wasn’t ashamed of me long.”

“What was it about being in trouble?”

“I didn’t know whether I could make him go, and I didn’t have a sou to
go away and leave him. He tried to give me a lot of money, you know. I
told him I had scads of it. He knew that was a lie. I couldn’t take his
money, you know.”

“No.”

“Oh, let’s not talk about it. There were some funny things, though. Do
give me a cigarette.”

I lit the cigarette.

“He learned his English as a waiter in Gib.”

“Yes.”

“He wanted to marry me, finally.”

“Really?”

“Of course. I can’t even marry Mike.”

“Maybe he thought that would make him Lord Ashley.”

“No. It wasn’t that. He really wanted to marry me. So I couldn’t go away
from him, he said. He wanted to make it sure I could never go away from
him. After I’d gotten more womanly, of course.”

“You ought to feel set up.”

“I do. I’m all right again. He’s wiped out that damned Cohn.”

“Good.”

“You know I’d have lived with him if I hadn’t seen it was bad for him.
We got along damned well.”

“Outside of your personal appearance.”

“Oh, he’d have gotten used to that.”

She put out the cigarette.

“I’m thirty-four, you know. I’m not going to be one of these bitches
that ruins children.”

“No.”

“I’m not going to be that way. I feel rather good, you know. I feel
rather set up.”

“Good.”

She looked away. I thought she was looking for another cigarette. Then I
saw she was crying. I could feel her crying. Shaking and crying. She
wouldn’t look up. I put my arms around her.

“Don’t let’s ever talk about it. Please don’t let’s ever talk about it.”

“Dear Brett.”

“I’m going back to Mike.” I could feel her crying as I held her close.
“He’s so damned nice and he’s so awful. He’s my sort of thing.”

She would not look up. I stroked her hair. I could feel her shaking.

“I won’t be one of those bitches,” she said. “But, oh, Jake, please
let’s never talk about it.”

We left the Hotel Montana. The woman who ran the hotel would not let me
pay the bill. The bill had been paid.

“Oh, well. Let it go,” Brett said. “It doesn’t matter now.”

We rode in a taxi down to the Palace Hotel, left the bags, arranged for
berths on the Sud Express for the night, and went into the bar of the
hotel for a cocktail. We sat on high stools at the bar while the barman
shook the Martinis in a large nickelled shaker.

“It’s funny what a wonderful gentility you get in the bar of a big
hotel,” I said.

“Barmen and jockeys are the only people who are polite any more.”

“No matter how vulgar a hotel is, the bar is always nice.”

“It’s odd.”

“Bartenders have always been fine.”

“You know,” Brett said, “it’s quite true. He is only nineteen. Isn’t it
amazing?”

We touched the two glasses as they stood side by side on the bar. They
were coldly beaded. Outside the curtained window was the summer heat of
Madrid.

“I like an olive in a Martini,” I said to the barman.

“Right you are, sir. There you are.”

“Thanks.”

“I should have asked, you know.”

The barman went far enough up the bar so that he would not hear our
conversation. Brett had sipped from the Martini as it stood, on the
wood. Then she picked it up. Her hand was steady enough to lift it after
that first sip.

“It’s good. Isn’t it a nice bar?”

“They’re all nice bars.”

“You know I didn’t believe it at first. He was born in 1905. I was in
school in Paris, then. Think of that.”

“Anything you want me to think about it?”

“Don’t be an ass. _Would_ you buy a lady a drink?”

“We’ll have two more Martinis.”

“As they were before, sir?”

“They were very good.” Brett smiled at him.

“Thank you, ma’am.”

“Well, bung-o,” Brett said.

“Bung-o!”

“You know,” Brett said, “he’d only been with two women before. He never
cared about anything but bull-fighting.”

“He’s got plenty of time.”

“I don’t know. He thinks it was me. Not the show in general.”

“Well, it was you.”

“Yes. It was me.”

“I thought you weren’t going to ever talk about it.”

“How can I help it?”

“You’ll lose it if you talk about it.”

“I just talk around it. You know I feel rather damned good, Jake.”

“You should.”

“You know it makes one feel rather good deciding not to be a bitch.”

“Yes.”

“It’s sort of what we have instead of God.”

“Some people have God,” I said. “Quite a lot.”

“He never worked very well with me.”

“Should we have another Martini?”

The barman shook up two more Martinis and poured them out into fresh
glasses.

“Where will we have lunch?” I asked Brett. The bar was cool. You could
feel the heat outside through the window.

“Here?” asked Brett.

“It’s rotten here in the hotel. Do you know a place called Botin’s?” I
asked the barman.

“Yes, sir. Would you like to have me write out the address?”

“Thank you.”

We lunched up-stairs at Botin’s. It is one of the best restaurants in
the world. We had roast young suckling pig and drank _rioja_ _alta_.
Brett did not eat much. She never ate much. I ate a very big meal and
drank three bottles of _rioja alta_.

“How do you feel, Jake?” Brett asked. “My God! what a meal you’ve
eaten.”

“I feel fine. Do you want a dessert?”

“Lord, no.”

Brett was smoking.

“You like to eat, don’t you?” she said.

“Yes.” I said. “I like to do a lot of things.”

“What do you like to do?”

“Oh,” I said, “I like to do a lot of things. Don’t you want a dessert?”

“You asked me that once,” Brett said.

“Yes,” I said. “So I did. Let’s have another bottle of _rioja alta_.”

“It’s very good.”

“You haven’t drunk much of it,” I said.

“I have. You haven’t seen.”

“Let’s get two bottles,” I said. The bottles came. I poured a little in
my glass, then a glass for Brett, then filled my glass. We touched
glasses.

“Bung-o!” Brett said. I drank my glass and poured out another. Brett put
her hand on my arm.

“Don’t get drunk, Jake,” she said. “You don’t have to.”

“How do you know?”

“Don’t,” she said. “You’ll be all right.”

“I’m not getting drunk,” I said. “I’m just drinking a little wine. I
like to drink wine.”

“Don’t get drunk,” she said. “Jake, don’t get drunk.”

“Want to go for a ride?” I said. “Want to ride through the town?”

“Right,” Brett said. “I haven’t seen Madrid. I should see Madrid.”

“I’ll finish this,” I said.

Down-stairs we came out through the first-floor dining-room to the
street. A waiter went for a taxi. It was hot and bright. Up the street
was a little square with trees and grass where there were taxis parked.
A taxi came up the street, the waiter hanging out at the side. I tipped
him and told the driver where to drive, and got in beside Brett. The
driver started up the street. I settled back. Brett moved close to me.
We sat close against each other. I put my arm around her and she rested
against me comfortably. It was very hot and bright, and the houses
looked sharply white. We turned out onto the Gran Via.

“Oh, Jake,” Brett said, “we could have had such a damned good time
together.”

Ahead was a mounted policeman in khaki directing traffic. He raised his
baton. The car slowed suddenly pressing Brett against me.

“Yes,” I said. “Isn’t it pretty to think so?” 
 Then there was the bad weather. It would come in one day when the fall
was over. We would have to shut the windows in the night against the
rain and the cold wind would strip the leaves from the trees in the
Place Contrescarpe. The leaves lay sodden in the rain and the wind drove
the rain against the big green autobus at the terminal and the Café des
Amateurs was crowded and the windows misted over from the heat and the
smoke inside. It was a sad, evilly run café where the drunkards of the
quarter crowded together and I kept away from it because of the smell of
dirty bodies and the sour smell of drunkenness. The men and women who
frequented the Amateurs stayed drunk all of the time, or all of the time
they could afford it, mostly on wine which they bought by the half-liter
or liter. Many strangely named apéritifs were advertised, but few people
could afford them except as a foundation to build their wine drunks on.
The women drunkards were called _poivrottes_ which meant female rummies.

The Café des Amateurs was the cesspool of the rue Mouffetard, that
wonderful narrow crowded market street which led into the Place
Contrescarpe. The squat toilets of the old apartment houses, one by the
side of the stairs on each floor with the two cleated cement shoe-shaped
elevations on each side of the aperture so a _locataire_ would not slip,
emptied into cesspools which were emptied by pumping into horse-drawn
tank wagons at night. In the summer time, with all windows open, we
would hear the pumping and the odor was very strong. The tank wagons
were painted brown and saffron color and in the moonlight when they
worked the rue Cardinal Lemoine their wheeled, horse-drawn cylinders
looked like Braque paintings. No one emptied the Café des Amateurs
though, and its yellowed poster stating the terms and penalties of the
law against public drunkenness was as flyblown and disregarded as its
clients were constant and ill-smelling.

All of the sadness of the city came suddenly with the first cold rains
of winter, and there were no more tops to the high white houses as you
walked but only the wet blackness of the street and the closed doors of
the small shops, the herb sellers, the stationery and the newspaper
shops, the midwife—second class—and the hotel where Verlaine had died
where I had a room on the top floor where I worked.

It was either six or eight flights up to the top floor and it was very
cold and I knew how much it would cost for a bundle of small twigs,
three wire-wrapped packets of short, half-pencil length pieces of split
pine to catch fire from the twigs, and then the bundle of half-dried
lengths of hard wood that I must buy to make a fire that would warm the
room. So I went to the far side of the street to look up at the roof in
the rain and see if any chimneys were going, and how the smoke blew.
There was no smoke and I thought about how the chimney would be cold and
might not draw and of the room possibly filling with smoke, and the fuel
wasted, and the money gone with it, and I walked on in the rain. I
walked down past the Lycée Henri Quatre and the ancient church of
St.-Étienne-du-Mont and the windswept Place du Panthéon and cut in for
shelter to the right and finally came out on the lee side of the
Boulevard St.-Michel and worked on down it past the Cluny and the
Boulevard St.-Germain until I came to a good café that I knew on the
Place St.-Michel.

It was a pleasant café, warm and clean and friendly, and I hung up my
old waterproof on the coat rack to dry and put my worn and weathered
felt hat on the rack above the bench and ordered a _café au lait_. The
waiter brought it and I took out a notebook from the pocket of the coat
and a pencil and started to write. I was writing about up in Michigan
and since it was a wild, cold, blowing day it was that sort of day in
the story. I had already seen the end of fall come through boyhood,
youth and young manhood, and in one place you could write about it
better than in another. That was called transplanting yourself, I
thought, and it could be as necessary with people as with other sorts of
growing things. But in the story the boys were drinking and this made me
thirsty and I ordered a rum St. James. This tasted wonderful on the cold
day and I kept on writing, feeling very well and feeling the good
Martinique rum warm me all through my body and my spirit.

A girl came in the café and sat by herself at a table near the window.
She was very pretty with a face fresh as a newly minted coin if they
minted coins in smooth flesh with rain-freshened skin, and her hair was
black as a crow’s wing and cut sharply and diagonally across her cheek.

I looked at her and she disturbed me and made me very excited. I wished
I could put her in the story, or anywhere, but she had placed herself so
she could watch the street and the entry and I knew she was waiting for
someone. So I went on writing.

The story was writing itself and I was having a hard time keeping up
with it. I ordered another rum St. James and I watched the girl whenever
I looked up, or when I sharpened the pencil with a pencil sharpener with
the shavings curling into the saucer under my drink.

I’ve seen you, beauty, and you belong to me now, whoever you are waiting
for and if I never see you again, I thought. You belong to me and all
Paris belongs to me and I belong to this notebook and this pencil.

Then I went back to writing and I entered far into the story and was
lost in it. I was writing it now and it was not writing itself and I did
not look up nor know anything about the time nor think where I was nor
order any more rum St. James. I was tired of rum St. James without
thinking about it. Then the story was finished and I was very tired. I
read the last paragraph and then I looked up and looked for the girl and
she had gone. I hope she’s gone with a good man, I thought. But I felt
sad.

I closed up the story in the notebook and put it in my inside pocket and
I asked the waiter for a dozen _portugaises_ and a half-carafe of the
dry white wine they had there. After writing a story I was always empty
and both sad and happy, as though I had made love, and I was sure this
was a very good story although I would not know truly how good until I
read it over the next day.

As I ate the oysters with their strong taste of the sea and their faint
metallic taste that the cold white wine washed away, leaving only the
sea taste and the succulent texture, and as I drank their cold liquid
from each shell and washed it down with the crisp taste of the wine, I
lost the empty feeling and began to be happy and to make plans.

Now that the bad weather had come, we could leave Paris for a while for
a place where this rain would be snow coming down through the pines and
covering the road and the high hillsides and at an altitude where we
would hear it creak as we walked home at night. Below Les Avants there
was a chalet where the pension was wonderful and where we would be
together and have our books and at night be warm in bed together with
the windows open and the stars bright. That was where we could go.
Traveling third class on the train was not expensive. The pension cost
very little more than we spent in Paris.

I would give up the room in the hotel where I wrote and there was only
the rent of 74 rue Cardinal Lemoine which was nominal. I had written
journalism for Toronto and the checks for that were due. I could write
that anywhere under any circumstances and we had money to make the trip.

Maybe away from Paris I could write about Paris as in Paris I could
write about Michigan. I did not know it was too early for that because I
did not know Paris well enough. But that was how it worked out
eventually. Anyway we would go if my wife wanted to, and I finished the
oysters and the wine and paid my score in the café and made it the
shortest way back up the Montaigne Ste. Geneviève through the rain, that
was now only local weather and not something that changed your life, to
the flat at the top of the hill.

“I think it would be wonderful, Tatie,” my wife said. She had a gently
modeled face and her eyes and her smile lighted up at decisions as
though they were rich presents. “When should we leave?”

“Whenever you want.”

“Oh, I want to right away. Didn’t you know?”

“Maybe it will be fine and clear when we come back. It can be very fine
when it is clear and cold.”

“I’m sure it will be,” she said. “Weren’t you good to think of going,
too.”




                         _Miss Stein Instructs_


When we came back to Paris it was clear and cold and lovely. The city
had accommodated itself to winter, there was good wood for sale at the
wood and coal place across our street, and there were braziers outside
of many of the good cafés so that you could keep warm on the terraces.
Our own apartment was warm and cheerful. We burned _boulets_ which were
molded, egg-shaped lumps of coal dust, on the wood fire, and on the
streets the winter light was beautiful. Now you were accustomed to see
the bare trees against the sky and you walked on the fresh-washed gravel
paths through the Luxembourg gardens in the clear sharp wind. The trees
were sculpture without their leaves when you were reconciled to them,
and the winter winds blew across the surfaces of the ponds and the
fountains blew in the bright light. All the distances were short now
since we had been in the mountains.

Because of the change in altitude I did not notice the grade of the
hills except with pleasure, and the climb up to the top floor of the
hotel where I worked, in a room that looked across all the roofs and the
chimneys of the high hill of the quarter, was a pleasure. The fireplace
drew well in the room and it was warm and pleasant to work. I brought
mandarines and roasted chestnuts to the room in paper packets and peeled
and ate the small tangerine-like oranges and threw their skins and spat
their seeds in the fire when I ate them and roasted chestnuts when I was
hungry. I was always hungry with the walking and the cold and the
working. Up in the room I had a bottle of kirsch that we had brought
back from the mountains and I took a drink of kirsch when I would get
toward the end of a story or toward the end of the day’s work. When I
was through working for the day I put away the notebook, or the paper,
in the drawer of the table and put any mandarines that were left in my
pocket. They would freeze if they were left in the room at night.

It was wonderful to walk down the long flights of stairs knowing that
I’d had good luck working. I always worked until I had something done
and I always stopped when I knew what was going to happen next. That way
I could be sure of going on the next day. But sometimes when I was
starting a new story and I could not get it going, I would sit in front
of the fire and squeeze the peel of the little oranges into the edge of
the flame and watch the sputter of blue that they made. I would stand
and look out over the roofs of Paris and think, “Do not worry. You have
always written before and you will write now. All you have to do is
write one true sentence. Write the truest sentence that you know.” So
finally I would write one true sentence, and then go on from there. It
was easy then because there was always one true sentence that I knew or
had seen or had heard someone say. If I started to write elaborately, or
like someone introducing or presenting something, I found that I could
cut that scrollwork or ornament out and throw it away and start with the
first true simple declarative sentence I had written. Up in that room I
decided that I would write one story about each thing that I knew about.
I was trying to do this all the time I was writing, and it was good and
severe discipline.

It was in that room too that I learned not to think about anything that
I was writing from the time I stopped writing until I started again the
next day. That way my subconscious would be working on it and at the
same time I would be listening to other people and noticing everything,
I hoped; learning, I hoped; and I would read so that I would not think
about my work and make myself impotent to do it. Going down the stairs
when I had worked well, and that needed luck as well as discipline, was
a wonderful feeling and I was free then to walk anywhere in Paris.

If I walked down by different streets to the Jardin du Luxembourg in the
afternoon I could walk through the gardens and then go to the Musée du
Luxembourg where the great paintings were that have now mostly been
transferred to the Louvre and the Jeu de Paume. I went there nearly
every day for the Cézannes and to see the Manets and the Monets and the
other Impressionists that I had first come to know about in the Art
Institute at Chicago. I was learning something from the painting of
Cézanne that made writing simple true sentences far from enough to make
the stories have the dimensions that I was trying to put in them. I was
learning very much from him but I was not articulate enough to explain
it to anyone. Besides it was a secret. But if the light was gone in the
Luxembourg I would walk up through the gardens and stop in at the studio
apartment where Gertrude Stein lived at 27 rue de Fleurus.

My wife and I had called on Miss Stein, and she and the friend who lived
with her had been very cordial and friendly and we had loved the big
studio with the great paintings. It was like one of the best rooms in
the finest museum except there was a big fireplace and it was warm and
comfortable and they gave you good things to eat and tea and natural
distilled liqueurs made from purple plums, yellow plums or wild
raspberries. These were fragrant, colorless alcohols served from
cut-glass carafes in small glasses and whether they were _quetsche_,
_mirabelle_ or _framboise_ they all tasted like the fruits they came
from, converted into a controlled fire on your tongue that warmed you
and loosened it.

Miss Stein was very big but not tall and was heavily built like a
peasant woman. She had beautiful eyes and a strong German-Jewish face
that also could have been Friulano and she reminded me of a northern
Italian peasant woman with her clothes, her mobile face and her lovely,
thick, alive immigrant hair which she wore put up in the same way she
had probably worn it in college. She talked all the time and at first it
was about people and places.

Her companion had a very pleasant voice, was small, very dark, with her
hair cut like Joan of Arc in the Boutet de Monvel illustrations and had
a very hooked nose. She was working on a piece of needlepoint when we
first met them and she worked on this and saw to the food and drink and
talked to my wife. She made one conversation and listened to two and
often interrupted the one she was not making. Afterwards she explained
to me that she always talked to the wives. The wives, my wife and I
felt, were tolerated. But we liked Miss Stein and her friend, although
the friend was frightening. The paintings and the cakes and the
_eau-de-vie_ were truly wonderful. They seemed to like us too and
treated us as though we were very good, well mannered and promising
children and I felt that they forgave us for being in love and being
married—time would fix that—and when my wife invited them to tea, they
accepted.

When they came to our flat they seemed to like us even more; but perhaps
that was because the place was so small and we were much closer
together. Miss Stein sat on the bed that was on the floor and asked to
see the stories I had written and she said that she liked them except
one called “Up in Michigan.”

“It’s good,” she said. “That’s not the question at all. But it is
_inaccrochable_. That means it is like a picture that a painter paints
and then he cannot hang it when he has a show and nobody will buy it
because they cannot hang it either.”

“But what if it is not dirty but it is only that you are trying to use
words that people would actually use? That are the only words that can
make the story come true and that you must use them? You have to use
them.”

“But you don’t get the point at all,” she said. “You mustn’t write
anything that is _inaccrochable_. There is no point in it. It’s wrong
and it’s silly.”

She herself wanted to be published in the _Atlantic Monthly_, she told
me, and she would be. She told me that I was not a good enough writer to
be published there or in _The Saturday Evening Post_ but that I might be
some new sort of writer in my own way but the first thing to remember
was not to write stories that were _inaccrochable_. I did not argue
about this nor try to explain again what I was trying to do about
conversation. That was my own business and it was much more interesting
to listen. That afternoon she told us, too, how to buy pictures.

“You can either buy clothes or buy pictures,” she said. “It’s that
simple. No one who is not very rich can do both. Pay no attention to
your clothes and no attention at all to the mode, and buy your clothes
for comfort and durability, and you will have the clothes money to buy
pictures.”

“But even if I never bought any more clothing ever,” I said, “I wouldn’t
have enough money to buy the Picassos that I want.”

“No. He’s out of your range. You have to buy the people of your own
age—of your own military service group. You’ll know them. You’ll meet
them around the quarter. There are always good new serious painters. But
it’s not you buying clothes so much. It’s your wife always. It’s women’s
clothes that are expensive.”

I saw my wife trying not to look at the strange, steerage clothes that
Miss Stein wore and she was successful. When they left we were still
popular, I thought, and we were asked to come again to 27 rue de
Fleurus.

It was later on that I was asked to come to the studio any time after
five in the winter time. I had met Miss Stein in the Luxembourg. I
cannot remember whether she was walking her dog or not, nor whether she
had a dog then. I know that I was walking myself, since we could not
afford a dog nor even a cat then, and the only cats I knew were in the
cafés or small restaurants or the great cats that I admired in
concierges’ windows. Later I often met Miss Stein with her dog in the
Luxembourg gardens; but I think this time was before she had one.

But I accepted her invitation, dog or no dog, and had taken to stopping
in at the studio, and she always gave me the natural _eau-de-vie_,
insisting on my refilling my glass, and I looked at the pictures and we
talked. The pictures were exciting and the talk was very good. She
talked, mostly, and she told me about modern pictures and about
painters—more about them as people than as painters—and she talked
about her work. She showed me the many volumes of manuscript that she
had written and that her companion typed each day. Writing every day
made her happy, but as I got to know her better I found that for her to
keep happy it was necessary that this steady daily output, which varied
with her energy, be published and that she receive recognition.

This had not become an acute situation when I first knew her, since she
had published three stories that were intelligible to anyone. One of
these stories, “Melanctha,” was very good and good samples of her
experimental writing had been published in book form and had been well
praised by critics who had met her or known her. She had such a
personality that when she wished to win anyone over to her side she
would not be resisted, and critics who met her and saw her pictures took
on trust writing of hers that they could not understand because of their
enthusiasm for her as a person, and because of their confidence in her
judgment. She had also discovered many truths about rhythms and the uses
of words in repetition that were valid and valuable and she talked well
about them.

But she disliked the drudgery of revision and the obligation to make her
writing intelligible, although she needed to have publication and
official acceptance, especially for the unbelievably long book called
_The Making of Americans_.

This book began magnificently, went on very well for a long way with
great stretches of great brilliance and then went on endlessly in
repetitions that a more conscientious and less lazy writer would have
put in the waste basket. I came to know it very well as I got—forced,
perhaps would be the word—Ford Madox Ford to publish it in _The
Transatlantic Review_ serially, knowing that it would outrun the life of
the review. For publication in the review I had to read all of Miss
Stein’s proof for her as this was a work which gave her no happiness.

On this cold afternoon when I had come past the concierge’s lodge and
the cold courtyard to the warmth of the studio, all that was years
ahead. On this day Miss Stein was instructing me about sex. By that time
we liked each other very much and I had already learned that everything
I did not understand probably had something to it. Miss Stein thought
that I was too uneducated about sex and I must admit that I had certain
prejudices against homosexuality since I knew its more primitive
aspects. I knew it was why you carried a knife and would use it when you
were in the company of tramps when you were a boy in the days when
wolves was not a slang term for men obsessed by the pursuit of women. I
knew many _inaccrochable_ terms and phrases from Kansas City days and
the mores of different parts of that city, Chicago and the lake boats.
Under questioning I tried to tell Miss Stein that when you were a boy
and moved in the company of men, you had to be prepared to kill a man,
know how to do it and really know that you would do it in order not to
be interfered with. That term was _accrochable_. If you knew you would
kill, other people sensed it very quickly and you were let alone; but
there were certain situations you could not allow yourself to be forced
into or trapped into. I could have expressed myself more vividly by
using an _inaccrochable_ phrase that wolves used on the lake boats, “Oh
gash may be fine but one eye for mine.” But I was always careful of my
language with Miss Stein even when true phrases might have clarified or
better expressed a prejudice.

“Yes, yes, Hemingway,” she said. “But you were living in a milieu of
criminals and perverts.”

I did not want to argue that, although I thought that I had lived in a
world as it was and there were all kinds of people in it and I tried to
understand them, although some of them I could not like and some I still
hated.

“But what about the old man with beautiful manners and a great name who
came to the hospital in Italy and brought me a bottle of Marsala or
Campari and behaved perfectly, and then one day I would have to tell the
nurse never to let that man into the room again?” I asked.

“Those people are sick and cannot help themselves and you should pity
them.”

“Should I pity so and so?” I asked. I gave his name but he delights so
in giving it himself that I feel there is no need to give it for him.

“No. He’s vicious. He’s a corrupter and he’s truly vicious.”

“But he’s supposed to be a good writer.”

“He’s not,” she said. “He’s just a showman and he corrupts for the
pleasure of corruption and he leads people into other vicious practices
as well. Drugs, for example.”

“And in Milan the man I’m to pity was not trying to corrupt me?”

“Don’t be silly. How could he hope to corrupt you? Do you corrupt a boy
like you, who drinks alcohol, with a bottle of Marsala? No, he was a
pitiful old man who could not help what he was doing. He was sick and he
could not help it and you should pity him.”

“I did at the time,” I said. “But I was disappointed because he had such
beautiful manners.”

I took another sip of the _eau-de-vie_ and pitied the old man and looked
at Picasso’s nude of the girl with the basket of flowers. I had not
started the conversation and thought it had become a little dangerous.
There were almost never any pauses in a conversation with Miss Stein,
but we had paused and there was something she wanted to tell me and I
filled my glass.

“You know nothing about any of this really, Hemingway,” she said.
“You’ve met known criminals and sick people and vicious people. The main
thing is that the act male homosexuals commit is ugly and repugnant and
afterwards they are disgusted with themselves. They drink and take
drugs, to palliate this, but they are disgusted with the act and they
are always changing partners and cannot be really happy.”

“I see.”

“In women it is the opposite. They do nothing that they are disgusted by
and nothing that is repulsive and afterwards they are happy and they can
lead happy lives together.”

“I see,” I said. “But what about so and so?”

“She’s vicious,” Miss Stein said. “She’s truly vicious, so she can never
be happy except with new people. She corrupts people.”

“I understand.”

“You’re sure you understand?”

There were so many things to understand in those days and I was glad
when we talked about something else. The park was closed so I had to
walk down along it to the rue de Vaugirard and around the lower end of
the park. It was sad when the park was closed and locked and I was sad
walking around it instead of through it and in a hurry to get home to
the rue Cardinal Lemoine. The day had started out so brightly too. I
would have to work hard tomorrow. Work could cure almost anything, I
believed then, and I believe now. Then all I had to be cured of, I
decided Miss Stein felt, was youth and loving my wife. I was not at all
sad when I got home to the rue Cardinal Lemoine and told my newly
acquired knowledge to my wife. In the night we were happy with our own
knowledge we already had and other new knowledge we had acquired in the
mountains.




                       _“Une Génération Perdue”_


It was easy to get into the habit of stopping in at 27 rue de Fleurus
late in the afternoon for the warmth and the great pictures and the
conversation. Often Miss Stein would have no guests and she was always
very friendly and for a long time she was affectionate. When I had come
back from trips that I had made to the different political conferences
or to the Near East or Germany for the Canadian paper and the news
services that I worked for she wanted me to tell her about all the
amusing details. There were funny parts always and she liked them and
also what the Germans call gallows-humor stories. She wanted to know the
gay part of how the world was going; never the real, never the bad.

I was young and not gloomy and there were always strange and comic
things that happened in the worst time and Miss Stein liked to hear
these. The other things I did not talk of and wrote by myself.

When I had not come back from any trips and would stop in at the rue de
Fleurus after working I would try sometimes to get Miss Stein to talk
about books. When I was writing, it was necessary for me to read after I
had written. If you kept thinking about it, you would lose the thing
that you were writing before you could go on with it the next day. It
was necessary to get exercise, to be tired in the body, and it was very
good to make love with whom you loved. That was better than anything.
But afterwards, when you were empty, it was necessary to read in order
not to think or worry about your work until you could do it again. I had
learned already never to empty the well of my writing, but always to
stop when there was still something there in the deep part of the well,
and let it refill at night from the springs that fed it.

To keep my mind off writing sometimes after I had worked I would read
writers who were writing then, such as Aldous Huxley, D. H. Lawrence or
any who had books published that I could get from Sylvia Beach’s library
or find along the quais.

“Huxley is a dead man,” Miss Stein said. “Why do you want to read a dead
man? Can’t you see he is dead?”

I could not see, then, that he was a dead man and I said that his books
amused me and kept me from thinking.

“You should only read what is truly good or what is frankly bad.”

“I’ve been reading truly good books all winter and all last winter and
I’ll read them next winter, and I don’t like frankly bad books.”

“Why do you read this trash? It is inflated trash, Hemingway. By a dead
man.”

“I like to see what they are writing,” I said. “And it keeps my mind off
me doing it.”

“Who else do you read now?”

“D. H. Lawrence,” I said. “He wrote some very good short stories, one
called ‘The Prussian Officer.’ ”

“I tried to read his novels. He’s impossible. He’s pathetic and
preposterous. He writes like a sick man.”

“I liked _Sons and Lovers_ and _The White Peacock_,” I said. “Maybe that
not so well. I couldn’t read _Women in Love_.”

“If you don’t want to read what is bad, and want to read something that
will hold your interest and is marvelous in its own way, you should read
Marie Belloc Lowndes.”

I had never heard of her, and Miss Stein loaned me _The Lodger_, that
marvelous story of Jack the Ripper and another book about murder at a
place outside Paris that could only be Enghien les Bains. They were both
splendid after-work books, the people credible and the action and the
terror never false. They were perfect for reading after you had worked
and I read all the Mrs. Belloc Lowndes that there was. But there was
only so much and none as good as the first two and I never found
anything as good for that empty time of day or night until the first
fine Simenon books came out.

I think Miss Stein would have liked the good Simenons—the first one I
read was either _L’Ecluse Numéro 1_, or _La Maison du Canal_—but I am
not sure because when I knew Miss Stein she did not like to read French
although she loved to speak it. Janet Flanner gave me the first two
Simenons I ever read. She loved to read French and she had read Simenon
when he was a crime reporter.

In the three or four years that we were good friends I cannot remember
Gertrude Stein ever speaking well of any writer who had not written
favorably about her work or done something to advance her career except
for Ronald Firbank and, later, Scott Fitzgerald. When I first met her
she did not speak of Sherwood Anderson as a writer but spoke glowingly
of him as a man and of his great, beautiful, warm Italian eyes and of
his kindness and his charm. I did not care about his great beautiful
warm Italian eyes but I liked some of his short stories very much. They
were simply written and sometimes beautifully written and he knew the
people he was writing about and cared deeply for them. Miss Stein did
not want to talk about his stories but always about him as a person.

“What about his novels?” I asked her. She did not want to talk about
Anderson’s works any more than she would talk about Joyce. If you
brought up Joyce twice, you would not be invited back. It was like
mentioning one general favorably to another general. You learned not to
do it the first time you made the mistake. You could always mention a
general, though, that the general you were talking to had beaten. The
general you were talking to would praise the beaten general greatly and
go happily into detail on how he had beaten him.

Anderson’s stories were too good to make happy conversation. I was
prepared to tell Miss Stein how strangely poor his novels were, but this
would have been bad too because it was criticizing one of her most loyal
supporters. When he wrote a novel finally called _Dark Laughter_, so
terribly bad, silly and affected that I could not keep from criticizing
it in a parody,[1] Miss Stein was very angry. I had attacked someone
that was a part of her apparatus. But for a long time before that she
was not angry. She, herself, began to praise Sherwood lavishly after he
had cracked up as a writer.

She was angry at Ezra Pound because he had sat down too quickly on a
small, fragile and, doubtless, uncomfortable chair, that it is quite
possible he had been given on purpose, and had either cracked or broken
it. That he was a great poet and a gentle and generous man and could
have accommodated himself in a normal-size chair was not considered. The
reasons for her dislike of Ezra, skillfully and maliciously put, were
invented years later.

It was when we had come back from Canada and were living in the rue
Notre-Dame-des-Champs and Miss Stein and I were still good friends that
Miss Stein made the remark about the lost generation. She had some
ignition trouble with the old Model T Ford she then drove and the young
man who worked in the garage and had served in the last year of the war
had not been adept, or perhaps had not broken the priority of other
vehicles, in repairing Miss Stein’s Ford. Anyway he had not been
_sérieux_ and had been corrected severely by the _patron_ of the garage
after Miss Stein’s protest. The _patron_ had said to him, “You are all a
_génération perdue_.”

“That’s what you are. That’s what you all are,” Miss Stein said. “All of
you young people who served in the war. You are a lost generation.”

“Really?” I said.

“You are,” she insisted. “You have no respect for anything. You drink
yourselves to death....”

“Was the young mechanic drunk?” I asked.

“Of course not.”

“Have you ever seen me drunk?”

“No. But your friends are drunk.”

“I’ve been drunk,” I said. “But I don’t come here drunk.”

“Of course not. I didn’t say that.”

“The boy’s _patron_ was probably drunk by eleven o’clock in the
morning,” I said. “That’s why he makes such lovely phrases.”

“Don’t argue with me, Hemingway,” Miss Stein said. “It does no good at
all. You’re all a lost generation, exactly as the garage keeper said.”

Later when I wrote my first novel I tried to balance Miss Stein’s
quotation from the garage keeper with one from Ecclesiastes. But that
night walking home I thought about the boy in the garage and if he had
ever been hauled in one of those vehicles when they were converted to
ambulances. I remembered how they used to burn out their brakes going
down the mountain roads with a full load of wounded and braking in low
and finally using the reverse, and how the last ones were driven over
the mountainside empty, so they could be replaced by big Fiats with a
good H-shift and metal-to-metal brakes. I thought of Miss Stein and
Sherwood Anderson and egotism and mental laziness versus discipline and
I thought who is calling who a lost generation? Then as I was getting up
to the Closerie des Lilas with the light on my old friend, the statue of
Marshal Ney with his sword out and the shadows of the trees on the
bronze, and he alone there and nobody behind him and what a fiasco he’d
made of Waterloo, I thought that all generations were lost by something
and always had been and always would be and I stopped at the Lilas to
keep the statue company and drank a cold beer before going home to the
flat over the sawmill. But sitting there with the beer, watching the
statue and remembering how many days Ney had fought, personally, with
the rear-guard on the retreat from Moscow that Napoleon had ridden away
from in the coach with Caulaincourt, I thought of what a warm and
affectionate friend Miss Stein had been and how beautifully she had
spoken of Apollinaire and of his death on the day of the Armistice in
1918 with the crowd shouting “_à bas Guillaume_” and Apollinaire, in his
delirium, thinking they were crying against him, and I thought, I will
do my best to serve her and see she gets justice for the good work she
had done as long as I can, so help me God and Mike Ney. But the hell
with her lost-generation talk and all the dirty, easy labels. When I got
home and into the courtyard and upstairs and saw my wife and my son and
his cat, F. Puss, all of them happy and a fire in the fireplace, I said
to my wife, “You know, Gertrude _is_ nice, anyway.”

“Of course, Tatie.”

“But she does talk a lot of rot sometimes.”

“I never hear her,” my wife said. “I’m a wife. It’s her friend that
talks to me.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

Footnote 1:

_The Torrents of Spring._




                       _Shakespeare and Company_


In those days there was no money to buy books. I borrowed books from the
rental library of Shakespeare and Company, which was the library and
bookstore of Sylvia Beach at 12 rue de l’Odéon. On a cold windswept
street, this was a warm, cheerful place with a big stove in winter,
tables and shelves of books, new books in the window, and photographs on
the wall of famous writers both dead and living. The photographs all
looked like snapshots and even the dead writers looked as though they
had really been alive. Sylvia had a lively, sharply sculptured face,
brown eyes that were as alive as a small animal’s and as gay as a young
girl’s, and wavy brown hair that was brushed back from her fine forehead
and cut thick below her ears and at the line of the collar of the brown
velvet jacket she wore. She had pretty legs and she was kind, cheerful
and interested, and loved to make jokes and gossip. No one that I ever
knew was nicer to me.

I was very shy when I first went into the bookshop and I did not have
enough money on me to join the rental library. She told me I could pay
the deposit any time I had the money and made me out a card and said I
could take as many books as I wished.

There was no reason for her to trust me. She did not know me and the
address I had given her, 74 rue Cardinal Lemoine, could not have been a
poorer one. But she was delightful and charming and welcoming and behind
her, as high as the wall and stretching out into the back room which
gave onto the inner court of the building, were shelves and shelves of
the wealth of the library.

I started with Turgenev and took the two volumes of _A Sportsman’s
Sketches_ and an early book of D. H. Lawrence, I think it was _Sons and
Lovers_, and Sylvia told me to take more books if I wanted. I chose the
Constance Garnett edition of _War and Peace_, and _The Gambler and Other
Stories_ by Dostoyevsky.

“You won’t be back very soon if you read all that,” Sylvia said.

“I’ll be back to pay,” I said. “I have some money in the flat.”

“I didn’t mean that,” she said. “You pay whenever it’s convenient.”

“When does Joyce come in?” I asked.

“If he comes in, it’s usually very late in the afternoon,” she said.
“Haven’t you ever seen him?”

“We’ve seen him at Michaud’s eating with his family,” I said. “But it’s
not polite to look at people when they are eating, and Michaud’s is
expensive.”

“Do you eat at home?”

“Mostly now,” I said. “We have a good cook.”

“There aren’t any restaurants in your immediate quarter, are there?”

“No. How did you know?”

“Larbaud lived there,” she said. “He liked it very much except for
that.”

“The nearest good cheap place to eat is over by the Panthéon.”

“I don’t know that quarter. We eat at home. You and your wife must come
sometime.”

“Wait until you see if I pay you,” I said. “But thank you very much.”

“Don’t read too fast,” she said.

Home in the rue Cardinal Lemoine was a two-room flat that had no hot
water and no inside toilet facilities except an antiseptic container,
not uncomfortable to anyone who was used to a Michigan outhouse. With a
fine view and a good mattress and springs for a comfortable bed on the
floor, and pictures we liked on the walls, it was a cheerful, gay flat.
When I got there with the books I told my wife about the wonderful place
I had found.

“But Tatie, you must go by this afternoon and pay,” she said.

“Sure I will,” I said. “We’ll both go. And then we’ll walk down by the
river and along the quais.”

“Let’s walk down the rue de Seine and look in all the galleries and in
the windows of the shops.”

“Sure. We can walk anywhere and we can stop at some new café where we
don’t know anyone and nobody knows us and have a drink.”

“We can have two drinks.”

“Then we can eat somewhere.”

“No. Don’t forget we have to pay the library.”

“We’ll come home and eat here and we’ll have a lovely meal and drink
Beaune from the co-operative you can see right out of the window there
with the price of the Beaune on the window. And afterwards we’ll read
and then go to bed and make love.”

“And we’ll never love anyone else but each other.”

“No. Never.”

“What a lovely afternoon and evening. Now we’d better have lunch.”

“I’m very hungry,” I said. “I worked at the café on a _café crème_.”

“How did it go, Tatie?”

“I think all right. I hope so. What do we have for lunch?”

“Little radishes, and good _foie de veau_ with mashed potatoes and an
endive salad. Apple tart.”

“And we’re going to have all the books in the world to read and when we
go on trips we can take them.”

“Would that be honest?”

“Sure.”

“Does she have Henry James too?”

“Sure.”

“My,” she said. “We’re lucky that you found the place.”

“We’re always lucky,” I said and like a fool I did not knock on wood.
There was wood everywhere in that apartment to knock on too.




                         _People of the Seine_


There were many ways of walking down to the river from the top of the
rue Cardinal Lemoine. The shortest one was straight down the street but
it was steep and it brought you out, after you hit the flat part and
crossed the busy traffic of the beginning of the Boulevard St.-Germain,
onto a dull part where there was a bleak, windy stretch of river bank
with the Halle aux Vins on your right. This was not like any other Paris
market but was a sort of bonded warehouse where wine was stored against
the payment of taxes and was as cheerless from the outside as a military
depot or a prison camp.

Across the branch of the Seine was the Île St.-Louis with the narrow
streets and the old, tall, beautiful houses, and you could go over there
or you could turn left and walk along the quais with the length of the
Île St.-Louis and then Notre-Dame and Île de la Cité opposite as you
walked.

In the bookstalls along the quais you could sometimes find American
books that had just been published for sale very cheap. The Tour
D’Argent restaurant had a few rooms above the restaurant that they
rented in those days, giving the people who lived there a discount in
the restaurant, and if the people who lived there left any books behind
there was a bookstall not far along the quai where the _valet de
chambre_ sold them and you could buy them from the proprietress for a
very few francs. She had no confidence in books written in English, paid
almost nothing for them, and sold them for a small and quick profit.

“Are they any good?” she asked me after we had become friends.

“Sometimes one is.”

“How can anyone tell?”

“I can tell when I read them.”

“But still it is a form of gambling. And how many people can read
English?”

“Save them for me and let me look them over.”

“No. I can’t save them. You don’t pass regularly. You stay away too long
at a time. I have to sell them as soon as I can. No one can tell if they
are worthless. If they turn out to be worthless, I would never sell
them.”

“How do you tell a valuable French book?”

“First there are the pictures. Then it is a question of the quality of
the pictures. Then it is the binding. If a book is good, the owner will
have it bound properly. All books in English are bound, but bound badly.
There is no way of judging them.”

After that bookstall near the Tour D’Argent there were no others that
sold American and English books until the quai des Grands Augustins.
There were several from there on to beyond the quai Voltaire that sold
books they bought from employees of the left bank hotels and especially
the Hotel Voltaire which had a wealthier clientele than most. One day I
asked another woman stall-keeper who was a friend of mine if the owners
ever sold the books.

“No,” she said. “They are all thrown away. That is why one knows they
have no value.”

“Friends give them to them to read on the boats.”

“Doubtless,” she said. “They must leave many on the boats.”

“They do,” I said. “The line keeps them and binds them and they become
the ships’ libraries.”

“That’s intelligent,” she said. “At least they are properly bound then.
Now a book like that would have value.”

I would walk along the quais when I had finished work or when I was
trying to think something out. It was easier to think if I was walking
and doing something or seeing people doing something that they
understood. At the head of the Île de la Cité below the Pont Neuf where
there was the statue of Henri Quatre, the island ended in a point like
the sharp bow of a ship and there was a small park at the water’s edge
with fine chestnut trees, huge and spreading, and in the currents and
back waters that the Seine made flowing past, there were excellent
places to fish. You went down a stairway to the park and watched the
fishermen there and under the great bridge. The good spots to fish
changed with the height of the river and the fishermen used long,
jointed, cane poles but fished with very fine leaders and light gear and
quill floats and expertly baited the piece of water that they fished.
They always caught some fish, and often they made excellent catches of
the dace-like fish that were called _goujon_. They were delicious fried
whole and I could eat a plateful. They were plump and sweet-fleshed with
a finer flavor than fresh sardines even, and were not at all oily, and
we ate them bones and all.

One of the best places to eat them was at an open-air restaurant built
out over the river at Bas Meudon where we would go when we had money for
a trip away from our quarter. It was called La Pêche Miraculeuse and had
a splendid white wine that was a sort of Muscadet. It was a place out of
a Maupassant story with the view over the river as Sisley had painted
it. You did not have to go that far to eat _goujon_. You could get a
very good _friture_ on the Île St.-Louis.

I knew several of the men who fished the fruitful parts of the Seine
between the Île St.-Louis and the Place du Verte Galente and sometimes,
if the day was bright, I would buy a liter of wine and a piece of bread
and some sausage and sit in the sun and read one of the books I had
bought and watch the fishing.

Travel writers wrote about the men fishing in the Seine as though they
were crazy and never caught anything; but it was serious and productive
fishing. Most of the fishermen were men who had small pensions, which
they did not know then would become worthless with inflation, or keen
fishermen who fished on their days or half-days off from work. There was
better fishing at Charenton, where the Marne came into the Seine, and on
either side of Paris, but there was very good fishing in Paris itself. I
did not fish because I did not have the tackle and I preferred to save
my money to fish in Spain. Then too I never knew when I would be through
working, nor when I would have to be away, and I did not want to become
involved in the fishing which had its good times and its slack times.
But I followed it closely and it was interesting and good to know about,
and it always made me happy that there were men fishing in the city
itself, having sound, serious fishing and taking a few _fritures_ home
to their families.

With the fishermen and the life on the river, the beautiful barges with
their own life on board, the tugs with their smoke-stacks that folded
back to pass under the bridges, pulling a tow of barges, the great elms
on the stone banks of the river, the plane trees and in some places the
poplars, I could never be lonely along the river. With so many trees in
the city, you could see the spring coming each day until a night of warm
wind would bring it suddenly in one morning. Sometimes the heavy cold
rains would beat it back so that it would seem that it would never come
and that you were losing a season out of your life. This was the only
truly sad time in Paris because it was unnatural. You expected to be sad
in the fall. Part of you died each year when the leaves fell from the
trees and their branches were bare against the wind and the cold, wintry
light. But you knew there would always be the spring, as you knew the
river would flow again after it was frozen. When the cold rains kept on
and killed the spring, it was as though a young person had died for no
reason.

In those days, though, the spring always came finally but it was
frightening that it had nearly failed.




                            _A False Spring_


When spring came, even the false spring, there were no problems except
where to be happiest. The only thing that could spoil a day was people
and if you could keep from making engagements, each day had no limits.
People were always the limiters of happiness except for the very few
that were as good as spring itself.

In the spring mornings I would work early while my wife still slept. The
windows were open wide and the cobbles of the street were drying after
the rain. The sun was drying the wet faces of the houses that faced the
window. The shops were still shuttered. The goatherd came up the street
blowing his pipes and a woman who lived on the floor above us came out
onto the sidewalk with a big pot. The goatherd chose one of the
heavy-bagged, black milk-goats and milked her into the pot while his dog
pushed the others onto the sidewalk. The goats looked around, turning
their necks like sight-seers. The goatherd took the money from the woman
and thanked her and went on up the street piping and the dog herded the
goats on ahead, their horns bobbing. I went back to writing and the
woman came up the stairs with the goat milk. She wore her felt-soled
cleaning shoes and I only heard her breathing as she stopped on the
stairs outside our door and then the shutting of her door. She was the
only customer for goat milk in our building.

I decided to go down and buy a morning racing paper. There was no
quarter too poor to have at least one copy of a racing paper but you had
to buy it early on a day like this. I found one in the rue Descartes at
the corner of the Place Contrescarpe. The goats were going down the rue
Descartes and I breathed the air in and walked back fast to climb the
stairs and get my work done. I had been tempted to stay out and follow
the goats down the early morning street. But before I started work again
I looked at the paper. They were running at Enghien, the small, pretty
and larcenous track that was the home of the outsider.

So that day after I had finished work we would go racing. Some money had
come from the Toronto paper that I did newspaper work for and we wanted
a long shot if we could find one. My wife had a horse one time at
Auteuil named Chèvre d’Or that was a hundred and twenty to one and
leading by twenty lengths when he fell at the last jump with enough
savings on him to keep us six months. We tried never to think of that.
We were ahead on that year until Chèvre d’Or.

“Do we have enough money to really bet, Tatie?” my wife asked.

“No. We’ll just figure to spend what we take. Is there something else
you’d rather spend it for?”

“Well,” she said.

“I know. It’s been terribly hard and I’ve been tight and mean about
money.”

“No,” she said. “But—”

I knew how severe I had been and how bad things had been. The one who is
doing his work and getting satisfaction from it is not the one the
poverty bothers. I thought of bathtubs and showers and toilets that
flushed as things that inferior people to us had or that you enjoyed
when you made trips, which we often made. There was always the public
bathhouse down at the foot of the street by the river. My wife had never
complained once about these things any more than she cried about Chèvre
d’Or when he fell. She had cried for the horse, I remembered, but not
for the money. I had been stupid when she needed a grey lamb jacket and
had loved it once she had bought it. I had been stupid about other
things too. It was all part of the fight against poverty that you never
win except by not spending. Especially if you buy pictures instead of
clothes. But then we did not think ever of ourselves as poor. We did not
accept it. We thought we were superior people and other people that we
looked down on and rightly mistrusted were rich. It had never seemed
strange to me to wear sweatshirts for underwear to keep warm. It only
seemed odd to the rich. We ate well and cheaply and drank well and
cheaply and slept well and warm together and loved each other.

“I think we ought to go,” my wife said. “We haven’t been for such a long
time. We’ll take a lunch and some wine. I’ll make good sandwiches.”

“We’ll go on the train and it’s cheap that way. But let’s not go if you
don’t think we should. Anything we’d do today would be fun. It’s a
wonderful day.”

“I think we should go.”

“You wouldn’t rather spend it some other way?”

“No,” she said arrogantly. She had the lovely high cheek-bones for
arrogance. “Who are we anyway?”

So we went out by the train from the Gare du Nord through the dirtiest
and saddest part of town and walked from the siding to the oasis of the
track. It was early and we sat on my raincoat on the fresh cropped grass
bank and had our lunch and drank from the wine bottle and looked at the
old grandstand, the brown wooden betting booths, the green of the track,
the darker green of the hurdles, and the brown shine of the water jumps
and the whitewashed stone walls and white posts and rails, the paddock
under the new leafed trees and the first horses being walked to the
paddock. We drank more wine and studied the form in the paper and my
wife lay down on the raincoat to sleep with the sun on her face. I went
over and found someone I knew from the old days at San Siro in Milano.
He gave me two horses.

“Mind, they’re no investment. But don’t let the price put you off.”

We won the first with half of the money that we had to spend and he paid
twelve to one, jumping beautifully, taking command on the far side of
the course and coming in four lengths ahead. We saved half of the money
and put it away and bet the other half on the second horse who broke
ahead, led all the way over the hurdles and on the flat just lasted to
the finish line with the favorite gaining on him with every jump and the
two whips flailing.

We went to have a glass of champagne at the bar under the stand and wait
for the prices to go up.

“My, but racing is very hard on people,” my wife said. “Did you see that
horse come up on him?”

“I can still feel it inside me.”

“What will he pay?”

“The _cote_ was eighteen to one. But they may have bet him at the last.”

The horses came by, ours wet, with his nostrils working wide to breathe,
the jockey patting him.

“Poor him,” my wife said. “We just bet.”

We watched them go on by and had another glass of champagne and then the
winning price came up: 85. That meant he paid eighty-five francs for
ten.

“They must have put a lot of money on at the end,” I said.

But we had made plenty of money, big money for us, and now we had spring
and money too. I thought that was all we needed. A day like that one, if
you split the winnings one quarter for each to spend, left a half for
racing capital. I kept the racing capital secret and apart from all
other capital.

Another day later that year when we had come back from one of our
voyages and had good luck at some track again we stopped at Pruniers on
the way home, going in to sit at the bar after looking at all the
clearly priced wonders in the window. We had oysters and _crabe
Mexicaine_ with glasses of Sancerre. We walked back through the
Tuileries in the dark and stood and looked through the Arc du Carrousel
up across the dark gardens with the lights of the Concorde behind the
formal darkness and then the long rise of lights toward the Arc de
Triomphe. Then we looked back toward the dark of the Louvre and I said,
“Do you really think that the three arches are in line? These two and
the Sermione in Milano?”

“I don’t know, Tatie. They say so and they ought to know. Do you
remember when we came out into the spring on the Italian side of the St.
Bernard after the climb in the snow, and you and Chink and I walked down
all day in the spring to Aosta?”

“Chink called it ‘across the St. Bernard in street shoes.’ Remember your
shoes?”

“My poor shoes. Do you remember us having fruit cup at Biffi’s in the
Galleria with Capri and fresh peaches and wild strawberries in a tall
glass pitcher with ice?”

“That time was what made me wonder about the three arches.”

“I remember the Sermione. It’s like this arch.”

“Do you remember the inn at Aigle where you and Chink sat in the garden
that day and read while I fished?”

“Yes, Tatie.”

I remembered the Rhône, narrow and grey and full of snow water and the
two trout streams on either side, the Stockalper and the Rhône canal.
The Stockalper was really clear that day and the Rhône canal was still
murky.

“Do you remember when the horse-chestnut trees were in bloom and how I
tried to remember a story that Jim Gamble, I think, had told me about a
wisteria vine and I couldn’t remember it?”

“Yes Tatie, and you and Chink always talking about how to make things
true, writing them, and put them rightly and not describe. I remember
everything. Sometimes he was right and sometimes you were right. I
remember the lights and textures and the shapes you argued about.”

Now we had come out of the gateway through the Louvre and crossed the
street outside and were standing on the bridge leaning on the stone and
looking down at the river.

“We all three argued about everything and always specific things and we
made fun of each other. I remember everything we ever did and everything
we ever said on the whole trip,” Hadley said. “I do really. About
everything. When you and Chink talked I was included. It wasn’t like
being a wife at Miss Stein’s.”

“I wish I could remember the story about the wisteria vine.”

“It wasn’t important. It was the vine that was important, Tatie.”

“Do you remember I brought some wine from Aigle home to the chalet? They
sold it to us at the inn. They said it should go with the trout. We
brought it wrapped in copies of _La gazette de Lucerne_, I think.”

“The Sion wine was even better. Do you remember how Mrs. Gangeswisch
cooked the trout _au bleu_ when we got back to the chalet? They were
such wonderful trout, Tatie, and we drank the Sion wine and ate out on
the porch with the mountainside dropping off below and we could look
across the lake and see the Dent du Midi with the snow half down it and
the trees at the mouth of the Rhône where it flowed into the lake.”

“We always miss Chink in the winter and the spring.”

“Always. And I miss him now when it is gone.”

Chink was a professional soldier and had gone out to Mons from
Sandhurst. I had met him first in Italy and he had been my best friend
and then our best friend for a long time. He spent his leaves with us
then.

“He’s going to try to get leave this next spring. He wrote last week
from Cologne.”

“I know. We should live in this time now and have every minute of it.”

“We’re watching the water now as it hits this buttress. Look what we can
see when we look up the river.”

We looked and there it all was: our river and our city and the island of
our city.

“We’re too lucky,” she said. “I hope Chink will come. He takes care of
us.”

“He doesn’t think so.”

“Of course not.”

“He thinks we explore together.”

“We do. But it depends on what you explore.”

We walked across the bridge and were on our own side of the river.

“Are you hungry again?” I said. “Us. Talking and walking.”

“Of course, Tatie. Aren’t you?”

“Let’s go to a wonderful place and have a truly grand dinner.”

“Where?”

“Michaud’s?”

“That’s perfect and it’s so close.”

So we walked up the rue des Saints-Pères to the corner of the rue Jacob
stopping and looking in the windows at pictures and at furniture. We
stood outside of Michaud’s restaurant reading the posted menu. Michaud’s
was crowded and we waited for people to come out, watching the tables
where people already had their coffee.

We were hungry again from walking and Michaud’s was an exciting and
expensive restaurant for us. It was where Joyce ate with his family
then, he and his wife against the wall, Joyce peering at the menu
through his thick glasses holding the menu up in one hand; Nora by him,
a hearty but delicate eater; Giorgio thin, foppish, sleek-headed from
the back; Lucia with heavy curly hair, a girl not quite yet grown; all
of them talking Italian.

Standing there I wondered how much of what we had felt on the bridge was
just hunger. I asked my wife and she said, “I don’t know, Tatie. There
are so many sorts of hunger. In the spring there are more. But that’s
gone now. Memory is hunger.”

I was being stupid, and looking in the window and seeing two _tournedos_
being served I knew I was hungry in a simple way.

“You said we were lucky today. Of course we were. But we had very good
advice and information.”

She laughed.

“I didn’t mean about the racing. You’re such a literal boy. I meant
lucky other ways.”

“I don’t think Chink cares for racing,” I said compounding my stupidity.

“No. He’d only care for it if he were riding.”

“Don’t you want to go racing any more?”

“Of course. And now we can go whenever we want again.”

“But you really want to go?”

“Of course. You do, don’t you?”

It was a wonderful meal at Michaud’s after we got in; but when we had
finished and there was no question of hunger any more the feeling that
had been like hunger when we were on the bridge was still there when we
caught the bus home. It was there when we came in the room and after we
had gone to bed and made love in the dark, it was there. When I woke
with the windows open and the moonlight on the roofs of the tall houses,
it was there. I put my face away from the moonlight into the shadow but
I could not sleep and lay awake thinking about it. We had both wakened
twice in the night and my wife slept sweetly now with the moonlight on
her face. I had to try to think it out and I was too stupid. Life had
seemed so simple that morning when I had wakened and found the false
spring and heard the pipes of the man with his herd of goats and gone
out and bought the racing paper.

But Paris was a very old city and we were young and nothing was simple
there, not even poverty, nor sudden money, nor the moonlight, nor right
and wrong nor the breathing of someone who lay beside you in the
moonlight.




                       _The End of an Avocation_


We went racing together many more times that year and other years after
I had worked in the early mornings, and Hadley enjoyed it and sometimes
she loved it. But it was not the climbs in the high mountain meadows
above the last forest, nor nights coming home to the chalet, nor was it
climbing with Chink, our best friend, over a high pass into new country.
It was not really racing either. It was gambling on horses. But we
called it racing.

Racing never came between us, only people could do that; but for a long
time it stayed close to us like a demanding friend. That was a generous
way to think of it. I, the one who was so righteous about people and
their destructiveness, tolerated this friend that was the falsest, most
beautiful, most exciting, vicious, and demanding because she could be
profitable. To make it profitable was more than a full-time job and I
had no time for that. But I justified it to myself because I wrote it,
even though in the end, when everything I had written was lost, there
was only one racing story that survived, because it was out in the
mails.

I was going to races alone more now and I was involved in them and
getting too mixed up with them. I worked two tracks in their season when
I could, Auteuil and Enghien. It took full-time work to try to handicap
intelligently and you could make no money that way. That was just how it
worked out on paper. You could buy a newspaper that gave you that.

You had to watch a jumping race from the top of the stands at Auteuil
and it was a fast climb up to see what each horse did and see the horse
that might have won and did not, and see why or maybe how he did not do
what he could have done. You watched the prices and all the shifts of
odds each time a horse you were following would start, and you had to
know how he was working and finally get to know when the stable would
try with him. He always might be beaten when he tried; but you should
know by then what his chances were. It was hard work but at Auteuil it
was beautiful to watch each day they raced when you could be there and
see the honest races with the great horses, and you got to know the
course as well as any place you had ever known. You knew many people
finally, jockeys and trainers and owners and too many horses and too
many things.

In principle I only bet when I had a horse to bet on but I sometimes
found horses that nobody believed in except the men who trained and rode
them that won race after race with me betting on them. I stopped finally
because it took too much time, I was getting too involved and I knew too
much about what went on at Enghien and at the flat racing tracks too.

When I stopped working on the races I was glad but it left an emptiness.
By then I knew that everything good and bad left an emptiness when it
stopped. But if it was bad, the emptiness filled up by itself. If it was
good you could only fill it by finding something better. I put the
racing capital back into the general funds and I felt relaxed and good.

The day I gave up racing I went over to the other side of the river and
met my friend Mike Ward at the travel desk in the Guaranty Trust which
was then at the corner of the rue des Italiens on the Boulevard des
Italiens. I was depositing the racing capital but I did not tell that to
anyone. I didn’t put it in the checkbook though I still kept it in my
head.

“Want to go to lunch?” I asked Mike.

“Sure, kid. Yeah I can do it. What’s the matter? Aren’t you going to the
track?”

“No.”

We had lunch at the square Louvois at a very good, plain bistro with a
wonderful white wine. Across the square was the Bibliothèque Nationale.

“You never went to the track much, Mike,” I said.

“No. Not for quite a long time.”

“Why did you lay off it?”

“I don’t know,” Mike said. “Yes. Sure I do. Anything you have to bet on
to get a kick isn’t worth seeing.”

“Don’t you ever go out?”

“Sometimes to see a big race. One with great horses.”

We spread paté on the good bistro bread and drank the white wine.

“Did you follow them a lot, Mike?”

“Oh yes.”

“What do you see that’s better?”

“Bicycle racing.”

“Really?”

“You don’t have to bet on it. You’ll see.”

“That track takes a lot of time.”

“Too much time. Takes all your time. I don’t like the people.”

“I was very interested.”

“Sure. You make out all right?”

“All right.”

“Good thing to stop,” Mike said.

“I’ve stopped.”

“Hard to do. Listen kid, we’ll go to the bike races sometime.”

That was a new and fine thing that I knew little about. But we did not
start it right away. That came later. It came to be a big part of our
lives later when the first part of Paris was broken up.

But for a long time it was enough just to be back in our part of Paris
and away from the track and to bet on our own life and work, and on the
painters that you knew and not try to make your living gambling and call
it by some other name. I have started many stories about bicycle racing
but have never written one that is as good as the races are both on the
indoor and outdoor tracks and on the roads. But I will get the Vélodrome
d’Hiver with the smoky light of the afternoon and the high-banked wooden
track and the whirring sound the tires made on the wood as the riders
passed, the effort and the tactics as the riders climbed and plunged,
each one a part of his machine; I will get the magic of the _demi-fond_,
the noise of the motors with their rollers set out behind them that the
_entraîneurs_ rode, wearing their heavy crash helmets and leaning
backward in their ponderous leather suits, to shelter the riders who
followed them from the air resistance, the riders in their lighter crash
helmets bent low over their handlebars their legs turning the huge gear
sprockets and the small front wheels touching the roller behind the
machine that gave them shelter to ride in, and the duels that were more
exciting than anything, the _put-put_ing of the motorcycles and the
riders elbow to elbow and wheel to wheel up and down and around at
deadly speed until one man could not hold the pace and broke away and
the solid wall of air that he had been sheltered against hit him.

There were so many kinds of racing. The straight sprints raced in heats
or in match races where the two riders would balance for long seconds on
their machines for the advantage of making the other rider take the lead
and then the slow circling and the final plunge into the driving purity
of speed. There were the programs of the team races of two hours, with a
series of pure sprints in their heats to fill the afternoon, the lonely
absolute speed events of one man racing an hour against the clock, the
terribly dangerous and beautiful races of one hundred kilometers on the
big banked wooden five-hundred-meter bowl of the Stade Buffalo, the
outdoor stadium at Montrouge where they raced behind big motorcycles,
Linart, the great Belgian champion that they called “the Sioux” for his
profile, dropping his head to suck up cherry brandy from a rubber tube
that connected with a hot water bottle under his racing shirt when he
needed it toward the end as he increased his savage speed, and the
championships of France behind big motors of the
six-hundred-and-sixty-meter cement track of the Parc du Prince near
Auteuil, the wickedest track of all where we saw that great rider Ganay
fall and heard his skull crumple under the crash helmet as you crack an
hard-boiled egg against a stone to peel it on a picnic. I must write the
strange world of the six-day races and the marvels of the road-racing in
the mountains. French is the only language it has ever been written in
properly and the terms are all French and that is what makes it hard to
write. Mike was right about it, there is no need to bet. But that comes
at another time in Paris.




                      _Hunger Was Good Discipline_


You got very hungry when you did not eat enough in Paris because all the
bakery shops had such good things in the windows and people ate outside
at tables on the sidewalk so that you saw and smelled the food. When you
had given up journalism and were writing nothing that anyone in America
would buy, explaining at home that you were lunching out with someone,
the best place to go was the Luxembourg gardens where you saw and
smelled nothing to eat all the way from the Place de l’Observatoire to
the rue de Vaugirard. There you could always go into the Luxembourg
museum and all the paintings were sharpened and clearer and more
beautiful if you were belly-empty, hollow-hungry. I learned to
understand Cézanne much better and to see truly how he made landscapes
when I was hungry. I used to wonder if he were hungry too when he
painted; but I thought possibly it was only that he had forgotten to
eat. It was one of those unsound but illuminating thoughts you have when
you have been sleepless or hungry. Later I thought Cézanne was probably
hungry in a different way.

After you came out of the Luxembourg you could walk down the narrow rue
Férou to the Place St.-Sulpice and there were still no restaurants, only
the quiet square with its benches and trees. There was a fountain with
lions, and pigeons walked on the pavement and perched on the statues of
the bishops. There was the church and there were shops selling religious
objects and vestments on the north side of the square.

From this square you could not go further toward the river without
passing shops selling fruits, vegetables, wines, or bakery and pastry
shops. But by choosing your way carefully you could work to your right
around the grey and white stone church and reach the rue de l’Odéon and
turn up to your right toward Sylvia Beach’s bookshop and on your way you
did not pass too many places where things to eat were sold. The rue de
l’Odéon was bare of eating places until you reached the square where
there were three restaurants.

By the time you reached 12 rue de l’Odéon your hunger was contained but
all of your perceptions were heightened again. The photographs looked
different and you saw books that you had never seen before.

“You’re too thin, Hemingway,” Sylvia would say. “Are you eating enough?”

“Sure.”

“What did you eat for lunch?”

My stomach would turn over and I would say, “I’m going home for lunch
now.”

“At three o’clock?”

“I didn’t know it was that late.”

“Adrienne said the other night she wanted to have you and Hadley for
dinner. We’d ask Fargue. You like Fargue, don’t you? Or Larbaud. You
like him. I know you like him. Or anyone you really like. Will you speak
to Hadley?”

“I know she’d love to come.”

“I’ll send her a _pneu_. Don’t you work so hard now that you don’t eat
properly.”

“I won’t.”

“Get home now before it’s too late for lunch.”

“They’ll save it.”

“Don’t eat cold food either. Eat a good hot lunch.”

“Did I have any mail?”

“I don’t think so. But let me look.”

She looked and found a note and looked up happily and then opened a
closed door in her desk.

“This came while I was out,” she said. It was a letter and it felt as
though it had money in it. “Wedderkop,” Sylvia said.

“It must be from _Der Querschnitt_. Did you see Wedderkop?”

“No. But he was here with George. He’ll see you. Don’t worry. Perhaps he
wanted to pay you first.”

“It’s six hundred francs. He says there will be more.”

“I’m awfully glad you reminded me to look. Dear Mr. Awfully Nice.”

“It’s damned funny that Germany is the only place I can sell anything.
To him and the _Frankfurter Zeitung_.”

“Isn’t it? But don’t you worry ever. You can sell stories to Ford,” she
teased me.

“Thirty francs a page. Say one story every three months in _The
Transatlantic_. Story five pages long makes one hundred and fifty francs
a quarter. Six hundred francs a year.”

“But, Hemingway, don’t worry about what they bring now. The point is
that you can write them.”

“I know. I can write them. But nobody will buy them. There is no money
coming in since I quit journalism.”

“They will sell. Look. You have the money for one right there.”

“I’m sorry, Sylvia. Forgive me for speaking about it.”

“Forgive you for what? Always talk about it or about anything. Don’t you
know all writers ever talk about is their troubles? But promise me you
won’t worry and that you’ll eat enough.”

“I promise.”

“Then get home now and have lunch.”

Outside on the rue de l’Odéon I was disgusted with myself for having
complained about things. I was doing what I did of my own free will and
I was doing it stupidly. I should have bought a large piece of bread and
eaten it instead of skipping a meal. I could taste the brown lovely
crust. But it is dry in your mouth without something to drink. You God
damn complainer. You dirty phony saint and martyr, I said to myself. You
quit journalism of your own accord. You have credit and Sylvia would
have loaned you money. She has plenty of times. Sure. And then the next
thing you would be compromising on something else. Hunger is healthy and
the pictures do look better when you are hungry. Eating is wonderful too
and do you know where you are going to eat right now?

Lipp’s is where you are going to eat and drink too.

It was a quick walk to Lipp’s and every place I passed that my stomach
noticed as quickly as my eyes or my nose made the walk an added
pleasure. There were few people in the _brasserie_ and when I sat down
on the bench against the wall with the mirror in back and a table in
front and the waiter asked if I wanted beer I asked for a _distingué_,
the big glass mug that held a liter, and for potato salad.

The beer was very cold and wonderful to drink. The _pommes à l’huile_
were firm and marinated and the olive oil delicious. I ground black
pepper over the potatoes and moistened the bread in the olive oil. After
the first heavy draft of beer I drank and ate very slowly. When the
_pommes à l’huile_ were gone I ordered another serving and a _cervelas_.
This was a sausage like a heavy, wide frankfurter split in two and
covered with a special mustard sauce.

I mopped up all the oil and all of the sauce with bread and drank the
beer slowly until it began to lose its coldness and then I finished it
and ordered a _demi_ and watched it drawn. It seemed colder than the
_distingué_ and I drank half of it.

I had not been worrying, I thought. I knew the stories were good and
someone would publish them finally at home. When I stopped doing
newspaper work I was sure the stories were going to be published. But
every one I sent out came back. What had made me so confident was Edward
O’Brien’s taking the “My Old Man” story for the _Best Short Stories_
book and then dedicating the book for that year to me. Then I laughed
and drank some more beer. The story had never been published in a
magazine and he had broken all his rules to take it for the book. I
laughed again and the waiter glanced at me. It was funny because, after
all that, he had spelled the name wrong. It was one of two stories I had
left when everything I had written was stolen in Hadley’s suitcase that
time at the Gare de Lyon when she was bringing the manuscripts down to
me to Lausanne as a surprise, so I could work on them on our holidays in
the mountains. She had put in the originals, the typescripts and the
carbons, all in manila folders. The only reason I had the one story was
that Lincoln Steffens had sent it out to some editor who sent it back.
It was in the mail while everything else was stolen. The other story
that I had was the one called “Up in Michigan” written before Miss Stein
had come to our flat. I had never had it copied because she said it was
_inaccrochable_. It had been in a drawer somewhere.

So after we had left Lausanne and gone down to Italy I showed the racing
story to O’Brien, a gentle, shy man, pale, with pale blue eyes, and
straight lanky hair he cut himself, who lived then as a boarder in a
monastery up above Rapallo. It was a bad time and I did not think I
could write any more then, and I showed the story to him as a curiosity,
as you might show, stupidly, the binnacle of a ship you had lost in some
incredible way, or as you might pick up your booted foot and make some
joke about it if it had been amputated after a crash. Then, when he read
the story, I saw he was hurt far more than I was. I had never seen
anyone hurt by a thing other than death or unbearable suffering except
Hadley when she told me about the things being gone. She had cried and
cried and could not tell me. I told her that no matter what the dreadful
thing was that had happened nothing could be that bad, and whatever it
was, it was all right and not to worry. We would work it out. Then,
finally, she told me. I was sure she could not have brought the carbons
too and I hired someone to cover for me on my newspaper job. I was
making good money then at journalism, and took the train for Paris. It
was true all right and I remember what I did in the night after I let
myself into the flat and found it was true. That was over now and Chink
had taught me never to discuss casualties; so I told O’Brien not to feel
so bad. It was probably good for me to lose early work and I told him
all that stuff you feed the troops. I was going to start writing stories
again I said and, as I said it, only trying to lie so that he would not
feel so bad, I knew that it was true.

Then I started to think in Lipp’s about when I had first been able to
write a story after losing everything. It was up in Cortina d’Ampezzo
when I had come back to join Hadley there after the spring skiing which
I had to interrupt to go on assignment to the Rhineland and the Ruhr. It
was a very simple story called “Out of Season” and I had omitted the
real end of it which was that the old man hanged himself. This was
omitted on my new theory that you could omit anything if you knew that
you omitted and the omitted part would strengthen the story and make
people feel something more than they understood.

Well, I thought, now I have them so they do not understand them. There
cannot be much doubt about that. There is most certainly no demand for
them. But they will understand the same way that they always do in
painting. It only takes time and it only needs confidence.

It is necessary to handle yourself better when you have to cut down on
food so you will not get too much hunger-thinking. Hunger is good
discipline and you learn from it. And as long as they do not understand
it you are ahead of them. Oh sure, I thought, I’m so far ahead of them
now that I can’t afford to eat regularly. It would not be bad if they
caught up a little.

I knew I must write a novel. But it seemed an impossible thing to do
when I had been trying with great difficulty to write paragraphs that
would be the distillation of what made a novel. It was necessary to
write longer stories now as you would train for a longer race. When I
had written a novel before, the one that had been lost in the bag stolen
at the Gare de Lyon, I still had the lyric facility of boyhood that was
as perishable and as deceptive as youth was. I knew it was probably a
good thing that it was lost, but I knew too that I must write a novel. I
would put it off though until I could not help doing it. I was damned if
I would write one because it was what I should do if we were to eat
regularly. When I had to write it, then it would be the only thing to do
and there would be no choice. Let the pressure build. In the meantime I
would write a long story about whatever I knew best.

By this time I had paid the check and gone out and turned to the right
and crossed the rue de Rennes so that I would not go to the Deux-Magots
for coffee and was walking up the rue Bonaparte on the shortest way
home.

What did I know best that I had not written about and lost? What did I
know about truly and care for the most? There was no choice at all.
There was only the choice of streets to take you back fastest to where
you worked. I went up Bonaparte to Guynemer, then to the rue d’Assas, up
the rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs to the Closerie des Lilas.

I sat in a corner with the afternoon light coming in over my shoulder
and wrote in the notebook. The waiter brought me a _café crème_ and I
drank half of it when it cooled and left it on the table while I wrote.
When I stopped writing I did not want to leave the river where I could
see the trout in the pool, its surface pushing and swelling smooth
against the resistance of the log-driven piles of the bridge. The story
was about coming back from the war but there was no mention of the war
in it.

But in the morning the river would be there and I must make it and the
country and all that would happen. There were days ahead to be doing
that each day. No other thing mattered. In my pocket was the money from
Germany so there was no problem. When that was gone some other money
would come in.

All I must do now was stay sound and good in my head until morning when
I would start to work again.




               _Ford Madox Ford and the Devil’s Disciple_


The Closerie des Lilas was the nearest good café when we lived in the
flat over the sawmill at 113 rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs, and it was one
of the best cafés in Paris. It was warm inside in the winter and in the
spring and fall it was very fine outside with the tables under the shade
of the trees on the side where the statue of Marshal Ney was, and the
square, regular tables under the big awnings along the boulevard. Two of
the waiters were our good friends. People from the Dôme and the Rotonde
never came to the Lilas. There was no one there they knew, and no one
would have stared at them if they came. In those days many people went
to the cafés at the corner of the Boulevard Montparnasse and the
Boulevard Raspail to be seen publicly and in a way such places
anticipated the columnists as the daily substitutes for immortality.

The Closerie des Lilas had once been a café where poets met more or less
regularly and the last principal poet had been Paul Fort whom I had
never read. But the only poet I ever saw there was Blaise Cendrars, with
his broken boxer’s face and his pinned-up empty sleeve, rolling a
cigarette with his one good hand. He was a good companion until he drank
too much and, at that time, when he was lying, he was more interesting
than many men telling a story truly. But he was the only poet who came
to the Lilas then and I only saw him there once. Most of the clients
were elderly bearded men in well worn clothes who came with their wives
or their mistresses and wore or did not wear thin red Legion of Honor
ribbons in their lapels. We thought of them all hopefully as scientists
or _savants_ and they sat almost as long over an apéritif as the men in
shabbier clothes who sat with their wives or mistresses over a _café
crème_ and wore the purple ribbon of the Palms of the Academy, which had
nothing to do with the French Academy, and meant, we thought, that they
were professors or instructors.

These people made it a comfortable café since they were all interested
in each other and in their drinks or coffees, or infusions, and in the
papers and periodicals which were fastened to rods, and no one was on
exhibition.

There were other people too who lived in the quarter and came to the
Lilas, and some of them wore Croix de Guerre ribbons in their lapels and
others also had the yellow and green of the Médaille Militaire, and I
watched how well they were overcoming the handicap of the loss of limbs,
and saw the quality of their artificial eyes and the degree of skill
with which their faces had been reconstructed. There was always an
almost iridescent shiny cast about the considerably reconstructed face,
rather like that of a well packed ski run, and we respected these
clients more than we did the _savants_ or the professors, although the
latter might well have done their military service too without
experiencing mutilation.

In those days we did not trust anyone who had not been in the war, but
we did not completely trust anyone, and there was a strong feeling that
Cendrars might well be a little less flashy about his vanished arm. I
was glad he had been in the Lilas early in the afternoon before the
regular clients had arrived.

On this evening I was sitting at a table outside of the Lilas watching
the light change on the trees and the buildings and the passage of the
great slow horses of the outer boulevards. The door of the café opened
behind me and to my right, and a man came out and walked to my table.

“Oh here you are,” he said.

It was Ford Madox Ford, as he called himself then, and he was breathing
heavily through a heavy, stained mustache and holding himself as upright
as an ambulatory, well clothed, up-ended hogshead.

“May I sit with you?” he asked, sitting down, and his eyes which were a
washed-out blue under colorless lids and eyebrows looked out at the
boulevard.

“I spent good years of my life that those beasts should be slaughtered
humanely,” he said.

“You told me,” I said.

“I don’t think so.”

“I’m quite sure.”

“Very odd. I’ve never told anyone in my life.”

“Will you have a drink?”

The waiter stood there and Ford told him he would have a Chambéry
Cassis. The waiter, who was tall and thin and bald on the top of his
head with hair slicked over and who wore a heavy old-style dragoon
mustache, repeated the order.

“No. Make it a _fine à l’eau_,” Ford said.

“A _fine à l’eau_ for Monsieur,” the waiter confirmed the order.

I had always avoided looking at Ford when I could and I always held my
breath when I was near him in a closed room, but this was the open air
and the fallen leaves blew along the sidewalks from my side of the table
past his, so I took a good look at him, repented, and looked across the
boulevard. The light was changed again and I had missed the change. I
took a drink to see if his coming had fouled it, but it still tasted
good.

“You’re very glum,” he said.

“No.”

“Yes you are. You need to get out more. I stopped by to ask you to the
little evenings we’re giving in that amusing Bal Musette near the Place
Contrescarpe on the rue Cardinal Lemoine.”

“I lived above it for two years before you came to Paris this last
time.”

“How odd. Are you sure?”

“Yes,” I said. “I’m sure. The man who owned it had a taxi and when I had
to get a plane he’d take me out to the field, and we’d stop at the zinc
bar of the Bal and drink a glass of white wine in the dark before we’d
start for the airfield.”

“I’ve never cared for flying,” Ford said. “You and your wife plan to
come to the Bal Musette Saturday night. It’s quite gay. I’ll draw you a
map so you can find it. I stumbled on it quite by chance.”

“It’s under 74 rue Cardinal Lemoine,” I said. “I lived on the third
floor.”

“There’s no number,” Ford said. “But you’ll be able to find it if you
can find the Place Contrescarpe.”

I took another long drink. The waiter had brought Ford’s drink and Ford
was correcting him. “It wasn’t a brandy and soda,” he said helpfully but
severely. “I ordered a Chambéry vermouth and Cassis.”

“It’s all right, Jean,” I said. “I’ll take the _fine_. Bring Monsieur
what he orders now.”

“What I ordered,” corrected Ford.

At that moment a rather gaunt man wearing a cape passed on the sidewalk.
He was with a tall woman and he glanced at our table and then away and
went on his way down the boulevard.

“Did you see me cut him?” Ford said. “_Did_ you see me cut him?”

“No. Who did you cut?”

“Belloc,” Ford said. “_Did_ I cut him!”

“I didn’t see it,” I said. “Why did you cut him?”

“For every good reason in the world,” Ford said. “_Did_ I cut him
though!”

He was thoroughly and completely happy. I had never seen Belloc and I
did not believe he had seen us. He looked like a man who had been
thinking of something and had glanced at the table almost automatically.
I felt badly that Ford had been rude to him, as, being a young man who
was commencing his education, I had a high regard for him as an older
writer. This is not understandable now but in those days it was a common
occurrence.

I thought it would have been pleasant if Belloc had stopped at the table
and I might have met him. The afternoon had been spoiled by seeing Ford
but I thought Belloc might have made it better.

“What are you drinking brandy for?” Ford asked me. “Don’t you know it’s
fatal for a young writer to start drinking brandy?”

“I don’t drink it very often,” I said. I was trying to remember what
Ezra Pound had told me about Ford, that I must never be rude to him,
that I must remember that he only lied when he was very tired, that he
was really a good writer and that he had been through very bad domestic
troubles. I tried hard to think of these things but the heavy, wheezing,
ignoble presence of Ford himself, only touching-distance away, made it
difficult. But I tried.

“Tell me why one cuts people,” I asked. Until then I had thought it was
something only done in novels by Ouida. I had never been able to read a
novel by Ouida, not even at some skiing place in Switzerland where
reading matter had run out when the wet south wind had come and there
were only the left-behind Tauchnitz editions of before the war. But I
was sure, by some sixth sense, that people cut one another in her
novels.

“A gentleman,” Ford explained, “will always cut a cad.”

I took a quick drink of brandy.

“Would he cut a bounder?” I asked.

“It would be impossible for a gentleman to know a bounder.”

“Then you can only cut someone you have known on terms of equality?” I
pursued.

“Naturally.”

“How would one ever meet a cad?”

“You might not know it, or the fellow could have become a cad.”

“What is a cad?” I asked. “Isn’t he someone that one has to thrash
within an inch of his life?”

“Not necessarily,” Ford said.

“Is Ezra a gentleman?” I asked.

“Of course not,” Ford said. “He’s an American.”

“Can’t an American be a gentleman?”

“Perhaps John Quinn,” Ford explained. “Certain of your ambassadors.”

“Myron T. Herrick?”

“Possibly.”

“Was Henry James a gentleman?”

“Very nearly.”

“Are you a gentleman?”

“Naturally. I have held His Majesty’s commission.”

“It’s very complicated,” I said. “Am I a gentleman?”

“Absolutely not,” Ford said.

“Then why are you drinking with me?”

“I’m drinking with you as a promising young writer. As a fellow writer
in fact.”

“Good of you,” I said.

“You might be considered a gentleman in Italy,” Ford said magnanimously.

“But I’m not a cad?”

“Of course not, dear boy. Who ever said such a thing?”

“I might become one,” I said sadly. “Drinking brandy and all. That was
what did for Lord Harry Hotspur in Trollope. Tell me, was Trollope a
gentleman?”

“Of course not.”

“You’re sure?”

“There might be two opinions. But not in mine.”

“Was Fielding? He was a judge.”

“Technically perhaps.”

“Marlowe?”

“Of course not.”

“John Donne?”

“He was a parson.”

“It’s fascinating,” I said.

“I’m glad you’re interested,” Ford said. “I’ll have a brandy and water
with you before I go.”

After Ford left it was dark and I walked over to the _kiosque_ and
bought a _Paris-Sport Complet_, the final edition of the afternoon
racing paper with the results at Auteuil, and the line on the next day’s
meeting at Enghien. The waiter Emile, who had replaced Jean on duty,
came to the table to see the results of the last race at Auteuil. A
great friend of mine who rarely came to the Lilas came over to the table
and sat down, and just then as my friend was ordering a drink from Emile
the gaunt man in the cape with the tall woman passed us on the sidewalk.
His glance drifted toward the table and then away.

“That’s Hilaire Belloc,” I said to my friend. “Ford was here this
afternoon and cut him dead.”

“Don’t be a silly ass,” my friend said. “That’s Aleister Crowley, the
diabolist. He’s supposed to be the wickedest man in the world.”

“Sorry,” I said.




                        _Birth of a New School_


The blue-backed notebooks, the two pencils and the pencil sharpener (a
pocket knife was too wasteful), the marble-topped tables, the smell of
early morning, sweeping out and mopping, and luck were all you needed.
For luck you carried a horse chestnut and a rabbit’s foot in your right
pocket. The fur had been worn off the rabbit’s foot long ago and the
bones and the sinews were polished by wear. The claws scratched in the
lining of your pocket and you knew your luck was still there.

Some days it went so well that you could make the country so that you
could walk into it through the timber to come out into the clearing and
work up onto the high ground and see the hills beyond the arm of the
lake. A pencil-lead might break off in the conical nose of the pencil
sharpener and you would use the small blade of the pen knife to clear it
or else sharpen the pencil carefully with the sharp blade and then slip
your arm through the sweat-salted leather of your pack strap to lift the
pack again, get the other arm through and feel the weight settle on your
back and feel the pine needles under your moccasins as you started down
for the lake.

Then you would hear someone say, “Hi, Hem. What are you trying to do?
Write in a café?”

Your luck had run out and you shut the notebook. This was the worst
thing that could happen. If you could keep your temper it would be
better but I was not good at keeping mine then and said, “You rotten son
of a bitch what are you doing in here off your filthy beat?”

“Don’t be insulting just because you want to act like an eccentric.”

“Take your dirty camping mouth out of here.”

“It’s a public café. I’ve just as much right here as you have.”

“Why don’t you go up to the Petite Chaumière where you belong?”

“Oh dear. Don’t be so tiresome.”

Now you could get out and hope it was an accidental visit and that the
visitor had only come in by chance and there was not going to be an
infestation. There were other good cafés to work in but they were a long
walk away and this was my home café. It was bad to be driven out of the
Closerie des Lilas. I had to make a stand or move. It was probably wiser
to move but the anger started to come and I said, “Listen. A bitch like
you has plenty of places to go. Why do you have to come here and louse a
decent café?”

“I just came in to have a drink. What’s wrong with that?”

“At home they’d serve you and then break the glass.”

“Where’s home? It sounds like a charming place.”

He was sitting at the next table, a tall fat young man with spectacles.
He had ordered a beer. I thought I would ignore him and see if I could
write. So I ignored him and wrote two sentences.

“All I did was speak to you.”

I went on and wrote another sentence. It dies hard when it is really
going and you are into it.

“I suppose you’ve gotten so great nobody can speak to you.”

I wrote another sentence that ended the paragraph and read it over. It
was still all right and I wrote the first sentence of the next
paragraph.

“You never think about anyone else or that they may have problems too.”

I had heard complaining all my life. I found I could go on writing and
that it was no worse than other noises, certainly better than Ezra
learning to play the bassoon.

“Suppose you wanted to be a writer and felt it in every part of your
body and it just wouldn’t come.”

I went on writing and I was beginning to have luck now as well as the
other thing.

“Suppose once it had come like an irresistible torrent and then it left
you mute and silent.”

Better than mute and noisy, I thought, and went on writing. He was in
full cry now and the unbelievable sentences were soothing as the noise
of a plank being violated in the saw-mill.

“We went to Greece,” I heard him say later. I had not heard him for some
time except as noise. I was ahead now and I could leave it and go on
tomorrow.

“You say you used it or you went there?”

“Don’t be vulgar,” he said. “Don’t you want me to tell you the rest?”

“No,” I said. I closed the notebook and put it in my pocket.

“Don’t you care how it came out?”

“No.”

“Don’t you care about life and the suffering of a fellow human being?”

“Not you.”

“You’re beastly.”

“Yes.”

“I thought you could help me, Hem.”

“I’d be glad to shoot you.”

“Would you?”

“No. There’s a law against it.”

“I’d do anything for you.”

“Would you?”

“Of course I would.”

“Then keep the hell away from this café. Start with that.”

I stood up and the waiter came over and I paid.

“Can I walk down to the sawmill with you, Hem?”

“No.”

“Well I’ll see you some other time.”

“Not here.”

“That’s perfectly right,” he said. “I promised.”

“What are you writing?” I made a mistake and asked.

“I’m writing the best I can. Just as you do. But it’s so terribly
difficult.”

“You shouldn’t write if you can’t write. What do you have to cry about
it for? Go home. Get a job. Hang yourself. Only don’t talk about it. You
could never write.”

“Why do you say that?”

“Did you ever hear yourself talk?”

“It’s writing I’m talking about.”

“Then shut up.”

“You’re just cruel,” he said. “Everybody always said you were cruel and
heartless and conceited. I always defended you. But not any more.”

“Good.”

“How can you be so cruel to a fellow human being?”

“I don’t know,” I said. “Look, if you can’t write why don’t you learn to
write criticism?”

“Do you think I should?”

“It would be fine,” I told him. “Then you can always write. You won’t
ever have to worry about it not coming nor being mute and silent. People
will read it and respect it.”

“Do you think I could be a good critic?”

“I don’t know how good. But you could be a critic. There will always be
people who will help you and you can help your own people.”

“What do you mean my own people?”

“The ones you go around with.”

“Oh them. They have their critics.”

“You don’t have to criticize books,” I said. “There’s pictures, plays,
ballet, the cinema—”

“You make it sound fascinating, Hem. Thank you so much. It’s so
exciting. It’s creative too.”

“Creation’s probably overrated. After all, God made the world in only
six days and rested on the seventh.”

“Of course there’s nothing to prevent me doing creative writing too.”

“Not a thing. Except you may set yourself impossibly high standards by
your criticism.”

“They’ll be high. You can count on that.”

“I’m sure they will be.”

He was a critic already so I asked him if he would have a drink and he
accepted.

“Hem,” he said, and I knew he was a critic now since, in conversation,
they put your name at the beginning of a sentence rather than at the
end, “I have to tell you I find your work just a little too stark.”

“Too bad,” I said.

“Hem it’s too stripped, too lean.”

“Bad luck.”

“Hem too stark, too stripped, too lean, too sinewy.”

I felt the rabbit’s foot in my pocket guiltily. “I’ll try to fatten it
up a little.”

“Mind, I don’t want it obese.”

“Hal,” I said, practicing speaking like a critic, “I’ll avoid that as
long as I can.”

“Glad we see eye to eye,” he said manfully.

“You’ll remember about not coming here when I’m working?”

“Naturally, Hem. Of course. I’ll have my own café now.”

“You’re very kind.”

“I try to be,” he said.

It would be interesting and instructive if the young man had turned out
to be a famous critic but it did not turn out that way although I had
high hopes for a while.

I did not think that he would come back the next day but I did not want
to take chances and I decided to give the Closerie a day’s rest. So the
next morning I woke early, boiled the rubber nipples and the bottles,
made the formula, finished the bottling, gave Mr. Bumby a bottle and
worked on the dining-room table before anyone but he, F. Puss the cat,
and I were awake. The two of them were quiet and good company and I
worked better than I had ever done. In those days you did not really
need anything, not even the rabbit’s foot, but it was good to feel it in
your pocket.




                       _With Pascin at the Dome_


It was a lovely evening and I had worked hard all day and left the flat
over the sawmill and walked out through the courtyard with the stacked
lumber, closed the door, crossed the street and went into the back door
of the bakery that fronted on the Boulevard Montparnasse and out through
the good bread smells of the ovens and the shop to the street. The
lights were on in the bakery and outside it was the end of the day and I
walked in the early dusk up the street and stopped outside the terrace
of the Nègre de Toulouse restaurant where our red and white checkered
napkins were in the wooden napkin rings in the napkin rack waiting for
us to come to dinner. I read the menu mimeographed in purple ink and saw
that the _plat du jour_ was cassoulet. It made me hungry to read the
name.

Mr. Lavigne, the proprietor, asked me how my work had gone and I said it
had gone very well. He said he had seen me working on the terrace of the
Closerie des Lilas early in the morning but he had not spoken to me
because I was so occupied.

“You had the air of a man alone in the jungle,” he said.

“I am like a blind pig when I work.”

“But were you not in the jungle, Monsieur?”

“In the bush,” I said.

I went on up the street looking in the windows and happy with the spring
evening and the people coming past. In the three principal cafés I saw
people that I knew by sight and others that I knew to speak to. But
there were always much nicer-looking people that I did not know that, in
the evening with the lights just coming on, were hurrying to some place
to drink together, to eat together and then to make love. The people in
the principal cafés might do the same thing or they might just sit and
drink and talk and love to be seen by others. The people that I liked
and had not met went to the big cafés because they were lost in them and
no one noticed them and they could be alone in them and be together. The
big cafés were cheap then too, and all had good beer and the apéritifs
cost reasonable prices that were clearly marked on the saucers that were
served with them.

On this evening I was thinking these wholesome but not original thoughts
and feeling extraordinarily virtuous because I had worked well and hard
on a day when I had wanted to go out to the races very badly. But at
this time I could not afford to go to the races, even though there was
money to be made there if you worked at it. It was before the days of
saliva tests and other methods of detecting artificially encouraged
horses and doping was very extensively practiced. But handicapping
beasts that are receiving stimulants, and detecting the symptoms in the
paddock and acting on your perceptions, which sometimes bordered on the
extrasensory, then backing them with money you cannot afford to lose, is
not the way for a young man supporting a wife and child to get ahead in
the full-time job of learning to write prose.

By any standards we were still very poor and I still made such small
economies as saying that I had been asked out for lunch and then
spending two hours walking in the Luxembourg gardens and coming back to
describe the marvelous lunch to my wife. When you are twenty-five and
are a natural heavyweight, missing a meal makes you very hungry. But it
also sharpens all of your perceptions, and I found that many of the
people I wrote about had very strong appetites and a great taste and
desire for food, and most of them were looking forward to having a
drink.

At the Nègre de Toulouse we drank the good Cahors wine from the quarter,
the half, or the full carafe, usually diluting it about one-third with
water. At home, over the sawmill, we had a Corsican wine that had great
authority and a low price. It was a very Corsican wine and you could
dilute it by half with water and still receive its message. In Paris,
then, you could live very well on almost nothing and by skipping meals
occasionally and never buying any new clothes, you could save and have
luxuries.

Coming back from The Select now where I had sheered off at the sight of
Harold Stearns who I knew would want to talk horses, those animals I was
thinking of righteously and light-heartedly as the beasts that I had
just foresworn. Full of my evening virtue I passed the collection of
inmates at the Rotonde and, scorning vice and the collective instinct,
crossed the boulevard to the Dôme. The Dôme was crowded too, but there
were people there who had worked.

There were models who had worked and there were painters who had worked
until the light was gone and there were writers who had finished a day’s
work for better or for worse, and there were drinkers and characters,
some of whom I knew and some that were only decoration.

I went over and sat down at a table with Pascin and two models who were
sisters. Pascin had waved to me while I had stood on the sidewalk on the
rue Delambre side wondering whether to stop and have a drink or not.
Pascin was a very good painter and he was drunk; steady, purposefully
drunk and making good sense. The two models were young and pretty. One
was very dark, small, beautifully built with a falsely fragile
depravity. The other was childlike and dull but very pretty in a
perishable childish way. She was not as well built as her sister, but
neither was anyone else that spring.

“The good and the bad sisters,” Pascin said. “I have money. What will
you drink?”

“_Une demi-blonde_,” I said to the waiter.

“Have a whisky. I have money.”

“I like beer.”

“If you really liked beer, you’d be at Lipp’s. I suppose you’ve been
working.”

“Yes.”

“It goes?”

“I hope so.”

“Good. I’m glad. And everything still tastes good?”

“Yes.”

“How old are you?”

“Twenty-five.”

“Do you want to bang her?” He looked toward the dark sister and smiled.
“She needs it.”

“You probably banged her enough today.”

She smiled at me with her lips open. “He’s wicked,” she said. “But he’s
nice.”

“You can take her over to the studio.”

“Don’t make piggishness,” the blonde sister said.

“Who spoke to you?” Pascin asked her.

“Nobody. But I said it.”

“Let’s be comfortable,” Pascin said. “The serious young writer and the
friendly wise old painter and the two beautiful young girls with all of
life before them.”

We sat there and the girls sipped at their drinks and Pascin drank
another _fine à l’eau_ and I drank the beer; but no one was comfortable
except Pascin. The dark girl was restless and she sat on display turning
her profile and letting the light strike the concave planes of her face
and showing me her breasts under the hold of the black sweater. Her hair
was cropped short and was sleek and dark as an oriental’s.

“You’ve posed all day,” Pascin said to her. “Do you have to model that
sweater now at the café?”

“It pleases me,” she said.

“You look like a Javanese toy,” he said.

“Not the eyes,” she said. “It’s more complicated than that.”

“You look like a poor perverted little _poupée_.”

“Perhaps,” she said. “But alive. That’s more than you.”

“We’ll see about that.”

“Good,” she said. “I like proofs.”

“You didn’t have any today?”

“Oh that,” she said and turned to catch the last evening light on her
face. “You were just excited about your work. He’s in love with
canvases,” she said to me. “There’s always some kind of dirtiness.”

“You want me to paint you and pay you and bang you to keep my head
clear, and be in love with you too,” Pascin said. “You poor little
doll.”

“You like me, don’t you, Monsieur?” she asked me.

“Very much.”

“But you’re too big,” she said sadly.

“Everyone is the same size in bed.”

“It’s not true,” her sister said. “And I’m tired of this talk.”

“Look,” Pascin said. “If you think I’m in love with canvases, I’ll paint
you tomorrow in water colors.”

“When do we eat?” her sister asked. “And where?”

“Will you eat with us?” the dark girl asked.

“No. I go to eat with my _légitime_.” That was what they said then. Now
they say “my _régulière_.”

“You have to go?”

“Have to and want to.”

“Go on, then,” Pascin said. “And don’t fall in love with typewriting
paper.”

“If I do, I’ll write with a pencil.”

“Water colors tomorrow,” he said. “All right, my children, I will drink
another and then we eat where you wish.”

“Chez Viking,” the dark girl said.

“Me too,” her sister urged.

“All right,” Pascin agreed. “Good night, _jeune homme_. Sleep well.”

“You too.”

“They keep me awake,” he said. “I never sleep.”

“Sleep tonight.”

“After Chez Les Vikings?” He grinned with his hat on the back of his
head. He looked more like a Broadway character of the Nineties than the
lovely painter that he was, and afterwards, when he had hanged himself,
I liked to remember him as he was that night at the Dôme. They say the
seeds of what we will do are in all of us, but it always seemed to me
that in those who make jokes in life the seeds are covered with better
soil and with a higher grade of manure.




                    _Ezra Pound and His Bel Esprit_


Ezra Pound was always a good friend and he was always doing things for
people. The studio where he lived with his wife Dorothy on the rue
Notre-Dame-des-Champs was as poor as Gertrude Stein’s studio was rich.
It had very good light and was heated by a stove and it had paintings by
Japanese artists that Ezra knew. They were all noblemen where they came
from and wore their hair cut long. Their hair glistened black and swung
forward when they bowed and I was very impressed by them but I did not
like their paintings. I did not understand them but they did not have
any mystery, and when I understood them they meant nothing to me. I was
sorry about this but there was nothing I could do about it.

Dorothy’s paintings I liked very much and I thought Dorothy was very
beautiful and built wonderfully. I also liked the head of Ezra by
Gaudier-Brzeska and I liked all of the photographs of this sculptor’s
work that Ezra showed me and that were in Ezra’s book about him. Ezra
also liked Picabia’s painting but I thought then that it was worthless.
I also disliked Wyndham Lewis’s painting which Ezra liked very much. He
liked the works of his friends, which is beautiful as loyalty but can be
disastrous as judgment. We never argued about these things because I
kept my mouth shut about things I did not like. If a man liked his
friends’ painting or writing, I thought it was probably like those
people who like their families, and it was not polite to criticize them.
Sometimes you can go quite a long time before you criticize families,
your own or those by marriage, but it is easier with bad painters
because they do not do terrible things and make intimate harm as
families can do. With bad painters all you need to do is not look at
them. But even when you have learned not to look at families nor listen
to them and have learned not to answer letters, families have many ways
of being dangerous. Ezra was kinder and more Christian about people than
I was. His own writing, when he would hit it right, was so perfect, and
he was so sincere in his mistakes and so enamored of his errors, and so
kind to people that I always thought of him as a sort of saint. He was
also irascible but so perhaps have been many saints.

Ezra wanted me to teach him to box and it was while we were sparring
late one afternoon in his studio that I first met Wyndham Lewis. Ezra
had not been boxing very long and I was embarrassed at having him work
in front of anyone he knew, and I tried to make him look as good as
possible. But it was not very good because he knew how to fence and I
was still working to make his left into his boxing hand and move his
left foot forward always and bring his right foot up parallel with it.
It was just basic moves. I was never able to teach him to throw a left
hook and to teach him to shorten his right was something for the future.

Wyndham Lewis wore a wide black hat, like a character in the quarter,
and was dressed like someone out of _La Bohème_. He had a face that
reminded me of a frog, not a bullfrog but just any frog, and Paris was
too big a puddle for him. At that time we believed that any writer or
painter could wear any clothes he owned and there was no official
uniform for the artist; but Lewis wore the uniform of a prewar artist.
It was embarrassing to see him and he watched superciliously while I
slipped Ezra’s left leads or blocked them with an open right glove.

I wanted us to stop but Lewis insisted we go on, and I could see that,
knowing nothing about what was going on, he was waiting, hoping to see
Ezra hurt. Nothing happened. I never countered but kept Ezra moving
after me sticking out his left hand and throwing a few right hands and
then said we were through and washed down with a pitcher of water and
toweled off and put on my sweatshirt.

We had a drink of something and I listened while Ezra and Lewis talked
about people in London and Paris. I watched Lewis carefully without
seeming to look at him, as you do when you are boxing, and I do not
think I had ever seen a nastier-looking man. Some people show evil as a
great race horse shows breeding. They have the dignity of a hard
_chancre_. Lewis did not show evil; he just looked nasty.

Walking home I tried to think what he reminded me of and there were
various things. They were all medical except toe-jam and that was a
slang word. I tried to break his face down and describe it but I could
only get the eyes. Under the black hat, when I had first seen them, the
eyes had been those of an unsuccessful rapist.

“I met the nastiest man I’ve ever seen today,” I told my wife.

“Tatie, don’t tell me about him,” she said. “Please don’t tell me about
him. We’re just going to have dinner.”

About a week afterwards I met Miss Stein and told her I’d met Wyndham
Lewis and asked her if she had ever met him.

“I call him ‘the Measuring Worm,’ ” she said. “He comes over from London
and he sees a good picture and takes a pencil out of his pocket and you
watch him measuring it on the pencil with his thumb. Sighting on it and
measuring it and seeing exactly how it is done. Then he goes back to
London and does it and it doesn’t come out right. He’s missed what it’s
all about.”

So I thought of him as the Measuring Worm. It was a kinder and more
Christian term than what I had thought about him myself. Later I tried
to like him and to be friends with him as I did with nearly all of
Ezra’s friends when he explained them to me. But this was how he seemed
to me on the first day I ever met him in Ezra’s studio.

Ezra was the most generous writer I have ever known and the most
disinterested. He helped poets, painters, sculptors and prose writers
that he believed in and he would help anyone whether he believed in them
or not if they were in trouble. He worried about everyone and in the
time when I first knew him he was most worried about T. S. Eliot who,
Ezra told me, had to work in a bank in London and so had insufficient
time and bad hours to function as a poet.

Ezra founded something called Bel Esprit with Miss Natalie Barney who
was a rich American woman and a patroness of the arts. Miss Barney had
been a friend of Rémy de Gourmont who was before my time and she had a
salon at her house on regular dates and a small Greek temple in her
garden. Many American and French women with money enough had salons and
I figured very early that they were excellent places for me to stay away
from, but Miss Barney, I believe, was the only one that had a small
Greek temple in her garden.

Ezra showed me the brochure for Bel Esprit and Miss Barney had allowed
him to use the small Greek temple on the brochure. The idea of Bel
Esprit was that we would all contribute a part of whatever we earned to
provide a fund to get Mr. Eliot out of the bank so he would have money
to write poetry. This seemed like a good idea to me and after we had got
Mr. Eliot out of the bank Ezra figured we would go right straight along
and fix up everybody.

I mixed things up a little by always referring to Eliot as Major Eliot
pretending to confuse him with Major Douglas an economist about whose
ideas Ezra was very enthusiastic. But Ezra understood that my heart was
in the right place and that I was full of Bel Esprit even though it
would annoy Ezra when I would solicit funds from my friends to get Major
Eliot out of the bank and someone would say what was a Major doing in a
bank anyway and if he had been axed by the military establishment did he
not have a pension or at least some gratuity?

In such cases I would explain to my friends that this was all beside the
point. Either you had Bel Esprit or you did not have it. If you had it
you would subscribe to get the Major out of the bank. If you didn’t it
was too bad. Didn’t they understand the significance of the small Greek
temple? No? I thought so. Too bad, Mac. Keep your money. We wouldn’t
touch it.

As a member of Bel Esprit I campaigned energetically and my happiest
dreams in those days were of seeing the Major stride out of the bank a
free man. I cannot remember how Bel Esprit finally cracked up but I
think it had something to do with the publication of _The Waste Land_
which won the Major the Dial award and not long after a lady of title
backed a review for Eliot called _The Criterion_ and Ezra and I did not
have to worry about him any more. The small Greek temple is, I believe,
still in the garden. It was always a disappointment to me that we had
not been able to get the Major out of the bank by Bel Esprit alone, as
in my dreams I had pictured him as coming, perhaps, to live in the small
Greek temple and that maybe I could go with Ezra when we would drop in
to crown him with laurel. I knew where there was fine laurel that I
could gather, riding out on my bicycle to get it, and I thought we could
crown him any time he felt lonesome or any time Ezra had gone over the
manuscript or the proofs of another big poem like _The Waste Land_. The
whole thing turned out badly for me morally, as so many things have,
because the money that I had earmarked for getting the Major out of the
bank I took out to Enghien and bet on jumping horses that raced under
the influence of stimulants. At two meetings the stimulated horses that
I was backing outraced the unstimulated or insufficiently stimulated
beasts except for one race in which our fancy had been overstimulated to
such a point that before the start he threw his jockey and breaking away
completed a full circuit of the steeplechase course jumping beautifully
by himself the way one can sometimes jump in dreams. Caught up and
remounted he started the race and figured honorably, as the French
racing phrase has it, but was out of the money.

I would have been happier if the amount of the wager had gone to Bel
Esprit which was no longer existent. But I comforted myself that with
those wagers which had prospered I could have contributed much more to
Bel Esprit than was my original intention.




                       _A Strange Enough Ending_


The way it ended with Gertrude Stein was strange enough. We had become
very good friends and I had done a number of practical things for her
such as getting her long book started as a serial with Ford and helping
type the manuscript and reading her proof and we were getting to be
better friends than I could ever wish to be. There is not much future in
men being friends with great women although it can be pleasant enough
before it gets better or worse, and there is usually even less future
with truly ambitious women writers. One time when I gave the excuse for
not having stopped in at 27 rue de Fleurus for some time that I did not
know whether Miss Stein would be at home, she said, “But Hemingway, you
have the run of the place. Don’t you know that? I mean it truly. Come in
any time and the maidservant”—she used her name but I have forgotten
it—“will look after you and you must make yourself at home until I
come.”

I did not abuse this but sometimes I would stop in and the maidservant
would give me a drink and I would look at the pictures and if Miss Stein
did not turn up I would thank the maidservant and leave a message and go
away. Miss Stein and a companion were getting ready to go south in Miss
Stein’s car and on this day Miss Stein had asked me to come by in the
forenoon to say good-by. She had asked us to come and visit, Hadley and
I staying at an hotel, but Hadley and I had other plans and other places
where we wanted to go. Naturally you say nothing about this, but you can
still hope to go and then it is impossible. I knew a little about the
system of not visiting people. I had to learn it. Much later Picasso
told me that he always promised the rich to come when they asked him
because it made them so happy and then something would happen and he
would be unable to appear. But that had nothing to do with Miss Stein
and he said it about other people.

It was a lovely spring day and I walked down from the Place de
l’Observatoire through the little Luxembourg. The horse-chestnut trees
were in blossom and there were many children playing on the graveled
walks with their nurses sitting on the benches, and I saw wood pigeons
in the trees and heard others that I could not see.

The maidservant opened the door before I rang and told me to come in and
to wait. Miss Stein would be down at any moment. It was before noon but
the maidservant poured me a glass of _eau-de-vie_, put it in my hand and
winked happily. The colorless alcohol felt good on my tongue and it was
still in my mouth when I heard someone speaking to Miss Stein as I had
never heard one person speak to another; never, anywhere, ever.

Then Miss Stein’s voice came pleading and begging, saying, “Don’t,
pussy. Don’t. Don’t, please don’t. I’ll do anything, pussy, but please
don’t do it. Please don’t. Please don’t, pussy.”

I swallowed the drink and put the glass down on the table and started
for the door. The maidservant shook her finger at me and whispered,
“Don’t go. She’ll be right down.”

“I have to go,” I said and tried not to hear any more as I left but it
was still going on and the only way I could not hear it was to be gone.
It was bad to hear and the answers were worse.

In the courtyard I said to the maidservant, “Please say I came to the
courtyard and met you. That I could not wait because a friend is sick.
Say _bon voyage_ for me. I will write.”

“_C’est entendu_, Monsieur. What a shame you cannot wait.”

“Yes,” I said. “What a shame.”

That was the way it finished for me, stupidly enough, although I still
did the small jobs, made the necessary appearances, brought people that
were asked for and waited dismissal with most of the other men friends
when that epoch came and the new friends moved in. It was sad to see new
worthless pictures hung in with the great pictures but it made no
difference any more. Not to me it didn’t. She quarreled with nearly all
of us that were fond of her except Juan Gris and she couldn’t quarrel
with him because he was dead. I am not sure that he would have cared
because he was past caring and it showed in his paintings.

Finally she even quarreled with the new friends but none of us followed
it any more. She got to look like a Roman emperor and that was fine if
you liked your women to look like Roman emperors. But Picasso had
painted her, and I could remember her when she looked like a woman from
Friuli.

In the end everyone, or not quite everyone, made friends again in order
not to be stuffy or righteous. I did too. But I could never make friends
again truly, neither in my heart nor in my head. When you cannot make
friends any more in your head is the worst. But it was more complicated
than that.




                   _The Man Who Was Marked for Death_


The afternoon I met Ernest Walsh, the poet, in Ezra’s studio, he was
with two girls in long mink coats and there was a long, shiny, hired car
from Claridge’s outside in the street with a uniformed chauffeur. The
girls were blondes and they had crossed on the same ship with Walsh. The
ship had arrived the day before and he had brought them with him to
visit Ezra.

Ernest Walsh was dark, intense, faultlessly Irish, poetic and clearly
marked for death as a character is marked for death in a motion picture.
He was talking to Ezra and I talked with the girls who asked me if I had
read Mr. Walsh’s poems. I had not and one of them brought out a
green-covered copy of Harriet Monroe’s _Poetry, A Magazine of Verse_ and
showed me poems by Walsh in it.

“He gets twelve hundred dollars apiece,” she said.

“For each poem,” the other girl said.

My recollection was that I received twelve dollars a page, if that, from
the same magazine. “He must be a very great poet,” I said.

“It’s more than Eddie Guest gets,” the first girl told me.

“It’s more than who’s that other poet gets. You know.”

“Kipling,” her friend said.

“It’s more than anybody gets ever,” the first girl said.

“Are you staying in Paris very long?” I asked them.

“Well no. Not really. We’re with a group of friends.”

“We came over on this boat, you know. But there wasn’t anyone on it
really. Mr. Walsh was on it of course.”

“Doesn’t he play cards?” I asked.

She looked at me in a disappointed but understanding way.

“No. He doesn’t have to. Not writing poetry the way he can write it.”

“What ship are you going back on?”

“Well that depends. It depends on the boats and on a lot of things. Are
you going back?”

“No. I’m getting by all right.”

“This is sort of the poor quarter over here, isn’t it?”

“Yes. But it’s pretty good. I work the cafés and I’m out at the track.”

“Can you go out to the track in those clothes?”

“No. This is my café outfit.”

“It’s kind of cute,” one of the girls said. “I’d like to see some of
that café life. Wouldn’t you, dear?”

“I would,” the other girl said. I wrote their names down in my address
book and promised to call them at Claridge’s. They were nice girls and I
said good-by to them and to Walsh and to Ezra. Walsh was still talking
to Ezra with great intensity.

“Don’t forget,” the taller one of the girls said.

“How could I?” I told her and shook hands with them both again.

The next I heard from Ezra about Walsh was that he had been bailed out
of Claridge’s by some lady admirers of poetry and of young poets who
were marked for death, and the next thing, some time after that, was
that he had financial backing from another source and was going to start
a new magazine in the quarter as a co-editor.

At the time the _Dial_, an American literary magazine edited by Scofield
Thayer, gave an annual award of, I believe, a thousand dollars for
excellence in the practice of letters by a contributor. This was a huge
sum for any straight writer to receive in those days, in addition to the
prestige, and the award had gone to various people, all deserving,
naturally. Two people, then, could live comfortably and well in Europe
on five dollars a day and could travel.

This quarterly, of which Walsh was one of the editors, was alleged to be
going to award a very substantial sum to the contributor whose work
should be judged the best at the end of the first four issues.

If the news was passed around by gossip or rumor, or if it was a matter
of personal confidence, cannot be said. Let us hope and believe always
that it was completely honorable in every way. Certainly nothing could
ever be said or imputed against Walsh’s co-editor.

It was not long after I heard rumors of this alleged award that Walsh
asked me to lunch one day at a restaurant that was the best and the most
expensive in the Boulevard St.-Michel quarter and after the oysters,
expensive flat faintly coppery _marennes_, not the familiar, deep,
inexpensive _portugaises_, and a bottle of Pouilly Fuisé, began to lead
up to it delicately. He appeared to be conning me as he had conned the
shills from the boat—if they were shills and if he had conned them, of
course—and when he asked me if I would like another dozen of the flat
oysters as he called them, I said I would like them very much. He did
not bother to look marked for death with me and this was a relief. He
knew I knew he had the con, not the kind you con with but the kind you
died of then and how bad it was, and he did not bother to have to cough,
and I was grateful for this at the table. I was wondering if he ate the
flat oysters in the same way the whores in Kansas City, who were marked
for death and practically everything else, always wished to swallow
semen as a sovereign remedy against the con; but I did not ask him. I
began my second dozen of the flat oysters, picking them from their bed
of crushed ice on the silver plate, watching their unbelievably delicate
brown edges react and cringe as I squeezed lemon juice on them and
separated the holding muscle from the shell and lifted them to chew them
carefully.

“Ezra’s a great, great poet,” Walsh said, looking at me with his own
dark poet’s eyes.

“Yes,” I said. “And a fine man.”

“Noble,” Walsh said. “Truly noble.” We ate and drank in silence as a
tribute to Ezra’s nobility. I missed Ezra and wished he were there. He
could not afford _marennes_ either.

“Joyce is great,” Walsh said. “Great. Great.”

“Great,” I said. “And a good friend.” We had become friends in his
wonderful period after the finishing of _Ulysses_ and before starting
what was called for a long time _Work in Progress_. I thought of Joyce
and remembered many things.

“I wish his eyes were better,” Walsh said.

“So does he,” I said.

“It is the tragedy of our time,” Walsh told me.

“Everybody has something wrong with them,” I said, trying to cheer up
the lunch.

“You haven’t.” He gave me all his charm and more, and then he marked
himself for death.

“You mean I am not marked for death?” I asked. I could not help it.

“No. You’re marked for Life.” He capitalized the word.

“Give me time,” I said.

He wanted a good steak, rare, and I ordered two tournedos with sauce
Béarnaise. I figured the butter would be good for him.

“What about a red wine?” he asked. The _sommelier_ came and I ordered a
Châteauneuf du Pape. I would walk it off afterwards along the quais. He
could sleep it off, or do what he wanted to. I might take mine
someplace, I thought.

It came as we finished the steak and french-fried potatoes and were
two-thirds through the Châteauneuf du Pape which is not a luncheon wine.

“There’s no use beating around the bush,” he said. “You know you’re to
get the award, don’t you?”

“Am I?” I said. “Why?”

“You’re to get it,” he said. He started to talk about my writing and I
stopped listening. It made me feel sick for people to talk about my
writing to my face, and I looked at him and his marked-for-death look
and I thought, you con man conning me with your con. I’ve seen a
battalion in the dust on the road, a third of them for death or worse
and no special marks on them, the dust for all, and you and your marked
for death look, you con man, making a living out of your death. Now you
will con me. Con not, that thou be not conned. Death was not conning
with him. It was coming all right.

“I don’t think I deserve it, Ernest,” I said, enjoying using my own
name, that I hated, to him. “Besides, Ernest, it would not be ethical,
Ernest.”

“It’s strange we have the same name, isn’t it?”

“Yes, Ernest,” I said. “It’s a name we must both live up to. You see
what I mean, don’t you, Ernest?”

“Yes, Ernest,” he said. He gave me complete, sad Irish understanding and
the charm.

So I was always very nice to him and to his magazine and when he had his
hemorrhages and left Paris asking me to see his magazine through the
printers, who did not read English, I did that. I had seen one of the
hemorrhages, it was very legitimate, and I knew that he would die all
right, and it pleased me at that time, which was a difficult time in my
life, to be extremely nice to him, as it pleased me to call him Ernest.
Also, I liked and admired his co-editor. She had not promised me any
award. She only wished to build a good magazine and pay her contributors
well.

One day, much later, I met Joyce who was walking along the Boulevard
St.-Germain after having been to a matinée alone. He liked to listen to
the actors, although he could not see them. He asked me to have a drink
with him and we went to the Deux-Magots and ordered dry sherry although
you will always read that he drank only Swiss white wine.

“How about Walsh?” Joyce said.

“A such and such alive is a such and such dead,” I said.

“Did he promise you that award?” Joyce asked.

“Yes.”

“I thought so,” Joyce said.

“Did he promise it to you?”

“Yes,” Joyce said. After a time he asked, “Do you think he promised it
to Pound?”

“I don’t know.”

“Best not to ask him,” Joyce said. We left it at that. I told Joyce of
my first meeting with him in Ezra’s studio with the girls in the long
fur coats and it made him happy to hear the story.




                      _Evan Shipman at the Lilas_


From the day I had found Sylvia Beach’s library I had read all of
Turgenev, what had been published in English of Gogol, the Constance
Garnett translations of Tolstoi and the English translations of Chekov.
In Toronto, before we had ever come to Paris, I had been told Katherine
Mansfield was a good short-story writer, even a great short-story
writer, but trying to read her after Chekov was like hearing the
carefully artificial tales of a young old-maid compared to those of an
articulate and knowing physician who was a good and simple writer.
Mansfield was like near-beer. It was better to drink water. But Chekov
was not water except for the clarity. There were some stories that
seemed to be only journalism. But there were wonderful ones too.

In Dostoyevsky there were things believable and not to be believed, but
some so true they changed you as you read them; frailty and madness,
wickedness and saintliness, and the insanity of gambling were there to
know as you knew the landscape and the roads in Turgenev, and the
movement of troops, the terrain and the officers and the men and the
fighting in Tolstoi. Tolstoi made the writing of Stephen Crane on the
Civil War seem like the brilliant imagining of a sick boy who had never
seen war but had only read the battles and chronicles and seen the Brady
photographs that I had read and seen at my grandparents’ house. Until I
read the _Chartreuse de Parme_ by Stendhal I had never read of war as it
was except in Tolstoi, and the wonderful Waterloo account by Stendhal
was an accidental piece in a book that had much dullness. To have come
on all this new world of writing, with time to read in a city like Paris
where there was a way of living well and working, no matter how poor you
were, was like having a great treasure given to you. You could take your
treasure with you when you traveled too, and in the mountains where we
lived in Switzerland and Italy, until we found Schruns in the high
valley in the Vorarlberg in Austria, there were always the books, so
that you lived in the new world you had found, the snow and the forests
and the glaciers and their winter problems and your high shelter in the
Hotel Taube in the village in the day time, and at night you could live
in the other wonderful world the Russian writers were giving you. At
first there were the Russians; then there were all the others. But for a
long time there were the Russians.

I remember asking Ezra once when we had walked home from playing tennis
out on the Boulevard Arago, and he had asked me into his studio for a
drink, what he really thought about Dostoyevsky.

“To tell you the truth, Hem,” Ezra said, “I’ve never read the
Rooshians.”

It was a straight answer and Ezra had never given me any other kind
verbally, but I felt very bad because here was the man I liked and
trusted the most as a critic then, the man who believed in the _mot
juste_—the one and only correct word to use—the man who had taught me
to distrust adjectives as I would later learn to distrust certain people
in certain situations; and I wanted his opinion on a man who almost
never used the _mot juste_ and yet had made his people come alive at
times, as almost no one else did.

“Keep to the French,” Ezra said. “You’ve plenty to learn there.”

“I know it,” I said. “I’ve plenty to learn everywhere.”

Later after leaving Ezra’s studio and walking along the street to the
sawmill, looking down the high-sided street to the opening at the end
where the bare trees showed and behind them the far façade of the Bal
Bullier across the width of the Boulevard St.-Michel, I opened the gate
and went in past the fresh-sawn lumber and left my racket in its press
beside the stairs that led to the top floor of the pavillon. I called up
the stairs but there was no one home.

“Madame has gone out and the _bonne_ and the baby too,” the wife of the
sawmill owner told me. She was a difficult woman, over-plump, with
brassy hair, and I thanked her.

“There was a young man to see you,” she said, using the term _jeune
homme_ instead of monsieur. “He said he would be at the Lilas.”

“Thank you very much,” I said. “If Madame comes in, please tell her I am
at the Lilas.”

“She went out with friends,” the wife said and gathering her purple
dressing gown about her went on high heels into the doorway of her own
_domaine_ without closing the door.

I walked down the street between the high, stained and streaked white
houses and turned to the right at the open, sunny end and went into the
sun-striped dusk of the Lilas.

There was no one there I knew and I went outside onto the terrace and
found Evan Shipman waiting. He was a fine poet and he knew and cared
about horses, writing and painting. He rose and I saw him tall and pale
and thin, his white shirt dirty and worn at the collar, his tie
carefully knotted, his worn and wrinkled grey suit, his fingers stained
darker than his hair, his nails dirty and his loving, deprecatory smile
that he held tightly not to show his bad teeth.

“It’s good to see you, Hem,” he said.

“How are you, Evan?” I asked.

“A little down,” he said. “I think I have the ‘Mazeppa’ licked though.
Have you been going well?”

“I hope so,” I said. “I was out playing tennis with Ezra when you came
by.”

“Is Ezra well?”

“Very.”

“I’m so glad. Hem, you know I don’t think that owner’s wife where you
live likes me. She wouldn’t let me wait upstairs for you.”

“I’ll tell her,” I said.

“Don’t bother. I can always wait here. It’s very pleasant in the sun
now, isn’t it?”

“It’s fall now,” I said. “I don’t think you dress warmly enough.”

“It’s only cool in the evening,” Evan said. “I’ll wear my coat.”

“Do you know where it is?”

“No. But it’s somewhere safe.”

“How do you know?”

“Because I left the poem in it.” He laughed heartily holding his lips
tightly over the teeth. “Have a whisky with me, please, Hem.”

“All right.”

“Jean,” Evan got up and called the waiter. “Two whiskies please.”

Jean brought the bottle and the glasses and two ten-franc saucers with
the syphon. He used no measuring glass and poured the whisky until the
glasses were more than three-quarters full. Jean loved Evan who often
went out and worked with him at his garden in Montrouge, out beyond the
Porte d’Orléans, on Jean’s day off.

“You mustn’t exaggerate,” Evan said to the tall old waiter.

“They are two whiskies, aren’t they?” the waiter asked.

We added water and Evan said, “Take the first sip very carefully, Hem.
Properly handled, they will hold us for some time.”

“Are you taking any care of yourself?” I asked.

“Yes, truly, Hem. Let’s talk about something else, should we?”

There was no one sitting on the terrace and the whisky was warming us
both although I was better dressed for the fall than Evan as I wore a
sweatshirt for underwear and then a shirt and a blue wool French
sailor’s sweater over the shirt.

“I’ve been wondering about Dostoyevsky,” I said. “How can a man write so
badly, so unbelievably badly, and make you feel so deeply?”

“It can’t be the translation,” Evan said. “She makes the Tolstoi come
out well written.”

“I know. I remember how many times I tried to read _War and Peace_ until
I got the Constance Garnett translation.”

“They say it can be improved on,” Evan said. “I’m sure it can although I
don’t know Russian. But we both know translations. But it comes out as a
hell of a novel, the greatest I suppose, and you can read it over and
over.”

“I know,” I said. “But you can’t read Dostoyevsky over and over. I had
_Crime and Punishment_ on a trip when we ran out of books down at
Schruns, and I couldn’t read it again when we had nothing to read. I
read the Austrian papers and studied German until we found some Trollope
in Tauchnitz.”

“God bless Tauchnitz,” Evan said. The whisky had lost its burning
quality and was now, when water was added, simply much too strong.

“Dostoyevsky was a shit, Hem,” Evan went on. “He was best on shits and
saints. He makes wonderful saints. It’s a shame we can’t reread him.”

“I’m going to try _The Brothers_ again. It was probably my fault.”

“You can read some of it again. Most of it. But then it will start to
make you angry, no matter how great it is.”

“Well, we were lucky to have had it to read the first time and maybe
there will be a better translation.”

“But don’t let it tempt you, Hem.”

“I won’t. I’m trying to do it so it will make it without you knowing it,
and so the more you read it, the more there will be.”

“Well I’m backing you in Jean’s whisky,” Evan said.

“He’ll get in trouble doing that,” I said.

“He’s in trouble already,” Evan said.

“How?”

“They’re changing the management,” Evan said. “The new owners want to
have a different clientele that will spend some money and they are going
to put in an American bar. The waiters are going to be in white jackets,
Hem, and they have been ordered to be ready to shave off their
mustaches.”

“They can’t do that to André and Jean.”

“They shouldn’t be able to, but they will.”

“Jean has had a mustache all his life. That’s a dragoon’s mustache. He
served in a cavalry regiment.”

“He’s going to have to cut it off.”

I drank the last of the whisky.

“Another whisky, Monsieur?” Jean asked. “A whisky, Monsieur Shipman?”
His heavy drooping mustache was a part of his thin, kind face, and the
bald top of his head glistened under the strands of hair that were
slicked across it.

“Don’t do it, Jean,” I said. “Don’t take a chance.”

“There is no chance,” he said, softly to us. “There is much confusion.
Many are leaving. _Entendu_, Messieurs,” he said aloud. He went into the
café and came out carrying the bottle of whisky, two large glasses, two
ten-franc gold-rimmed saucers and a seltzer bottle.

“No, Jean,” I said.

He put the glasses down on the saucers and filled them almost to the
brim with whisky and took the remains of the bottle back into the café.
Evan and I squirted a little seltzer into the glasses.

“It was a good thing Dostoyevsky didn’t know Jean,” Evan said. “He might
have died of drink.”

“What are we going to do with these?”

“Drink them,” Evan said. “It’s a protest. It’s direct action.”

On the following Monday when I went to the Lilas to work in the morning,
André served me a _bovril_, which is a cup of beef extract and water. He
was short and blond and where his stubby mustache had been, his lip was
as bare as a priest’s. He was wearing a white American barman’s coat.

“And Jean?”

“He won’t be in until tomorrow.”

“How is he?”

“It took him longer to reconcile himself. He was in a heavy cavalry
regiment throughout the war. He had the Croix de Guerre and the Médaille
Militaire.”

“I did not know he was so badly wounded.”

“No. He was wounded of course but it was the other sort of Médaille
Militaire he has. For gallantry.”

“Tell him I asked for him.”

“Of course,” André said. “I hope it will not take him too long to
reconcile himself.”

“Please give him Mr. Shipman’s greeting too.”

“Mr. Shipman is with him,” André said. “They are gardening together.”




                           _An Agent of Evil_


The last thing Ezra said to me before he left the rue
Notre-Dame-des-Champs to go to Rapallo was, “Hem, I want you to keep
this jar of opium and give it to Dunning only when he needs it.”

It was a large cold-cream jar and when I unscrewed the top the content
was dark and sticky and it had the smell of very raw opium. Ezra had
bought it from an Indian chief, he said, on the avenue de l’Opéra near
the Boulevard des Italiens and it had been very expensive. I thought it
must have come from the old Hole in the Wall bar which was a hangout for
deserters and for dope peddlers during and after the first war. The Hole
in the Wall was a very narrow bar with a red-painted façade, little more
than a passageway, on the rue des Italiens. At one time it had a rear
exit into the sewers of Paris from which you were supposed to be able to
reach the catacombs. Dunning was Ralph Cheever Dunning, a poet who
smoked opium and forgot to eat. When he was smoking too much he could
only drink milk and he wrote in _terza riruce_ which endeared him to
Ezra who also found fine qualities in his poetry. He lived in the same
courtyard where Ezra had his studio and Ezra had called me in to help
him when Dunning was dying a few weeks before Ezra was to leave Paris.

“Dunning is dying,” Ezra’s message said. “Please come at once.”

Dunning looked like a skeleton as he lay on the mattress and he would
certainly have eventually died of malnutrition but I finally convinced
Ezra that few people ever died while speaking in well rounded phrases
and that I had never known any man to die while speaking in _terza
riruce_ and that I doubted even if Dante could do it. Ezra said he was
not talking in _terza riruce_ and I said that perhaps it only sounded
like _terza riruce_ because I had been asleep when he had sent for me.
Finally after a night with Dunning waiting for death to come, the matter
was put in the hands of a physician and Dunning was taken to a private
clinic to be disintoxicated. Ezra guaranteed his bills and enlisted the
aid of I do not know which lovers of poetry on Dunning’s behalf. Only
the delivery of the opium in any true emergency was left to me. It was a
sacred charge coming from Ezra and I only hoped I could live up to it
and determine the state of a true emergency. It came when Ezra’s
concierge arrived one Sunday morning at the sawmill yard and shouted up
to the open window where I was studying the racing form, “_Monsieur
Dunning est monté sur le toit et refuse catégoriquement de descendre._”

Dunning having climbed to the roof of the studio and refusing
categorically to come down seemed a valid emergency and I found the
opium jar and walked up the street with the concierge who was a small
and intense woman very excited by the situation.

“Monsieur has what is needed?” she asked me.

“Absolutely,” I said. “There will be no difficulty.”

“Monsieur Pound thinks of everything,” she said. “He is kindness
personified.”

“He is indeed,” I said. “And I miss him every day.”

“Let us hope that Monsieur Dunning will be reasonable.”

“I have what it takes,” I assured her.

When we reached the courtyard where the studios were the concierge said,
“He’s come down.”

“He must have known I was coming,” I said.

I climbed the outside stairway that led to Dunning’s place and knocked.
He opened the door. He was gaunt and seemed unusually tall.

“Ezra asked me to bring you this,” I said and handed him the jar. “He
said you would know what it was.”

He took the jar and looked at it. Then he threw it at me. It struck me
on the chest or the shoulder and rolled down the stairs.

“You son of a bitch,” he said. “You bastard.”

“Ezra said you might need it,” I said. He countered that by throwing a
milk bottle.

“You are sure you don’t need it?” I asked.

He threw another milk bottle. I retreated and he hit me with yet another
milk bottle in the back. Then he shut the door.

I picked up the jar which was only slightly cracked and put it in my
pocket.

“He did not seem to want the gift of Monsieur Pound,” I said to the
concierge.

“Perhaps he will be tranquil now,” she said.

“Perhaps he has some of his own,” I said.

“Poor Monsieur Dunning,” she said.

The lovers of poetry that Ezra had organized rallied to Dunning’s aid
again eventually. My own intervention and that of the concierge had been
unsuccessful. The jar of alleged opium which had been cracked I stored
wrapped in waxed paper and carefully tied in one of an old pair of
riding boots. When Evan Shipman and I were removing my personal effects
from that apartment some years later the boots were still there but the
jar was gone. I do not know why Dunning threw the milk bottles at me
unless he remembered my lack of credulity the night of his first dying,
or whether it was only an innate dislike of my personality. But I
remember the happiness that the phrase “_Monsieur Dunning est monté sur
le toit et refuse catégoriquement de descendre_” gave to Evan Shipman.
He believed there was something symbolic about it. I would not know.
Perhaps Dunning took me for an agent of evil or of the police. I only
know that Ezra tried to be kind to Dunning as he was kind to so many
people and I always hoped Dunning was as fine a poet as Ezra believed
him to be. For a poet he threw a very accurate milk bottle. But Ezra,
who was a very great poet, played a good game of tennis too. Evan
Shipman, who was a very fine poet and who truly did not care if his
poems were ever published, felt that it should remain a mystery.

“We need more true mystery in our lives, Hem,” he once said to me. “The
completely unambitious writer and the really good unpublished poem are
the things we lack most at this time. There is, of course, the problem
of sustenance.”




                           _Scott Fitzgerald_


    _His talent was as natural as the pattern that was made by the
    dust on a butterfly’s wings. At one time he understood it no
    more than the butterfly did and he did not know when it was
    brushed or marred. Later he became conscious of his damaged
    wings and of their construction and he learned to think and
    could not fly any more because the love of flight was gone and
    he could only remember when it had been effortless._

The first time I ever met Scott Fitzgerald a very strange thing
happened. Many strange things happened with Scott but this one I was
never able to forget. He had come into the Dingo bar in the rue Delambre
where I was sitting with some completely worthless characters, had
introduced himself and introduced a tall, pleasant man who was with him
as Dunc Chaplin, the famous pitcher. I had not followed Princeton
baseball and had never heard of Dunc Chaplin but he was extraordinarily
nice, unworried, relaxed and friendly and I much preferred him to Scott.

Scott was a man then who looked like a boy with a face between handsome
and pretty. He had very fair wavy hair, a high forehead, excited and
friendly eyes and a delicate long-lipped Irish mouth that, on a girl,
would have been the mouth of a beauty. His chin was well built and he
had good ears and a handsome, almost beautiful, unmarked nose. This
should not have added up to a pretty face, but that came from the
coloring, the very fair hair and the mouth. The mouth worried you until
you knew him and then it worried you more.

I was very curious to see him and I had been working very hard all day
and it seemed quite wonderful that here should be Scott Fitzgerald and
the great Dunc Chaplin whom I had never heard of but who was now my
friend. Scott did not stop talking and since I was embarrassed by what
he said—it was all about my writing and how great it was—I kept on
looking at him closely and noticed instead of listening. We still went
under the system, then, that praise to the face was open disgrace. Scott
had ordered champagne and he and Dunc Chaplin and I drank it together
with, I think, some of the worthless characters. I do not think that
Dunc or I followed the speech very closely, for it was a speech and I
kept on observing Scott. He was lightly built and did not look in
awfully good shape, his face being faintly puffy. His Brooks Brothers
clothes fitted him well and he wore a white shirt with a buttoned-down
collar and a Guard’s tie. I thought I ought to tell him about the tie,
maybe, because they did have British in Paris and one might come into
the Dingo—there were two there at the time—but then I thought the hell
with it and I looked at him some more. It turned out later he had bought
the tie in Rome.

I wasn’t learning very much from looking at him now except that he had
well shaped, capable-looking hands, not too small, and when he sat down
on one of the bar stools I saw that he had very short legs. With normal
legs he would have been perhaps two inches taller. We had finished the
first bottle of champagne and started on the second and the speech was
beginning to run down.

Both Dunc and I were beginning to feel even better than we had felt
before the champagne and it was nice to have the speech ending. Until
then I had felt that what a great writer I was had been carefully kept
secret between myself and my wife and only those people we knew well
enough to speak to. I was glad Scott had come to the same happy
conclusion as to this possible greatness, but I was also glad he was
beginning to run out of the speech. But after the speech came the
question period. You could study him and neglect to follow the speech,
but the questions were inescapable. Scott, I was to find, believed that
the novelist could find out what he needed to know by direct questioning
of his friends and acquaintances. The interrogation was direct.

“Ernest,” he said. “You don’t mind if I call you Ernest, do you?”

“Ask Dunc,” I said.

“Don’t be silly. This is serious. Tell me, did you and your wife sleep
together before you were married?”

“I don’t know.”

“What do you mean you don’t know?”

“I don’t remember.”

“But how can you not remember something of such importance?”

“I don’t know,” I said. “It is odd, isn’t it?”

“It’s worse than odd,” Scott said. “You must be able to remember.”

“I’m sorry. It’s a pity, isn’t it?”

“Don’t talk like some limey,” he said. “Try to be serious and remember.”

“Nope,” I said. “It’s hopeless.”

“You could make an honest effort to remember.”

The speech comes pretty high, I thought. I wondered if he gave everyone
the speech, but I didn’t think so because I had watched him sweat while
he was making it. The sweat had come out on his long, perfect Irish
upper lip in tiny drops, and that was when I had looked down away from
his face and checked on the length of his legs, drawn up as he sat on
the bar stool. Now I looked back at his face again and it was then that
the strange thing happened.

As he sat there at the bar holding the glass of champagne the skin
seemed to tighten over his face until all the puffiness was gone and
then it drew tighter until the face was like a death’s head. The eyes
sank and began to look dead and the lips were drawn tight and the color
left the face so that it was the color of used candle wax. This was not
my imagination. His face became a true death’s head, or death mask, in
front of my eyes.

“Scott,” I said. “Are you all right?”

He did not answer and his face looked more drawn than ever.

“We’d better get him to a first aid station,” I said to Dunc Chaplin.

“No. He’s all right.”

“He looks like he is dying.”

“No. That’s the way it takes him.”

We got him into a taxi and I was very worried but Dunc said he was all
right and not to worry about him. “He’ll probably be all right by the
time he gets home,” he said.

He must have been because, when I met him at the Closerie des Lilas a
few days later, I said that I was sorry the stuff had hit him that way
and that maybe we had drunk it too fast while we were talking.

“What do you mean you are sorry? What stuff hit me what way? What are
you talking about, Ernest?”

“I meant the other night at the Dingo.”

“There was nothing wrong with me at the Dingo. I simply got tired of
those absolutely bloody British you were with and went home.”

“There weren’t any British there when you were there. Only the
bartender.”

“Don’t try to make a mystery of it. You know the ones I mean.”

“Oh,” I said. He had gone back to the Dingo later. Or he’d gone there
another time. No, I remembered, there had been two British there. It was
true. I remembered who they were. They had been there all right.

“Yes,” I said. “Of course.”

“That girl with the phony title who was so rude and that silly drunk
with her. They said they were friends of yours.”

“They are. And she _is_ very rude sometimes.”

“You see. There’s no use to make mysteries simply because one has drunk
a few glasses of wine. Why did you want to make the mysteries? It isn’t
the sort of thing I thought you would do.”

“I don’t know.” I wanted to drop it. Then I thought of something. “Were
they rude about your tie?” I asked.

“Why should they have been rude about my tie? I was wearing a plain
black knitted tie with a white polo shirt.”

I gave up then and he asked me why I liked this café and I told him
about it in the old days and he began to try to like it too and we sat
there, me liking it and he trying to like it, and he asked questions and
told me about writers and publishers and agents and critics and George
Horace Lorimer, and the gossip and economics of being a successful
writer, and he was cynical and funny and very jolly and charming and
endearing, even if you were careful about anyone becoming endearing. He
spoke slightingly but without bitterness of everything he had written,
and I knew his new book must be very good for him to speak, without
bitterness, of the faults of past books. He wanted me to read the new
book, _The Great Gatsby_, as soon as he could get his last and only copy
back from someone he had loaned it to. To hear him talk of it, you would
never know how very good it was, except that he had the shyness about it
that all non-conceited writers have when they have done something very
fine, and I hoped he would get the book quickly so that I might read it.

Scott told me that he had heard from Maxwell Perkins that the book was
not selling well but that it had very fine reviews. I do not remember
whether it was that day, or much later, that he showed me a review by
Gilbert Seldes that could not have been better. It could only have been
better if Gilbert Seldes had been better. Scott was puzzled and hurt
that the book was not selling well but, as I said, he was not at all
bitter then and he was both shy and happy about the book’s quality.

On this day as we sat outside on the terrace of the Lilas and watched it
get dusk and the people passing on the sidewalk and the grey light of
the evening changing, there was no chemical change in him from the two
whisky and sodas that we drank. I watched carefully for it, but it did
not come and he asked no shameless questions, did nothing embarrassing,
made no speeches, and acted as a normal, intelligent and charming
person.

He told me that he and Zelda, his wife, had been compelled to abandon
their small Renault motor car in Lyon because of bad weather and he
asked me if I would go down to Lyon with him on the train to pick up the
car and drive up with him to Paris. The Fitzgeralds had rented a
furnished flat at 14 rue de Tilsitt not far from the Etoile. It was late
spring now and I thought the country would be at its best and we could
have an excellent trip. Scott seemed so nice and so reasonable, and I
had watched him drink two good solid whiskies and nothing happened, and
his charm and his seeming good sense made the other night at the Dingo
seem like an unpleasant dream. So I said I would like to go down to Lyon
with him and when did he want to leave.

We agreed to meet the next day and we then arranged to leave for Lyon on
the express train that left in the morning. This train left at a
convenient hour and was very fast. It made only one stop, as I recall,
at Dijon. We planned to get into Lyon, have the car checked and in good
shape, have an excellent dinner and get an early-morning start back
towards Paris.

I was enthusiastic about the trip. I would have the company of an older
and successful writer, and in the time we would have to talk in the car
I would certainly learn much that it would be useful to know. It is
strange now to remember thinking of Scott as an older writer, but at the
time, since I had not yet read _The Great Gatsby_, I thought of him as a
much older writer. I thought he wrote _Saturday Evening Post_ stories
that had been readable three years before but I never thought of him as
a serious writer. He had told me at the Closerie des Lilas how he wrote
what he thought were good stories, and which really were good stories
for the _Post_, and then changed them for submission, knowing exactly
how he must make the twists that made them into salable magazine
stories. I had been shocked at this and I said I thought it was whoring.
He said it was whoring but that he had to do it as he made his money
from the magazines to have money ahead to write decent books. I said
that I did not believe anyone could write any way except the very best
he could write without destroying his talent. Since he wrote the real
story first, he said, the destruction and changing of it that he did at
the end did him no harm. I could not believe this and I wanted to argue
him out of it but I needed a novel to back up my faith and to show him
and convince him, and I had not yet written any such novel. Since I had
started to break down all my writing and get rid of all facility and try
to make instead of describe, writing had been wonderful to do. But it
was very difficult, and I did not know how I would ever write anything
as long as a novel. It often took me a full morning of work to write a
paragraph.

My wife, Hadley, was happy for me to make the trip, though she did not
take seriously the writing of Scott’s that she had read. Her idea of a
good writer was Henry James. But she thought it was a good idea for me
to take a rest from work and make the trip, although we both wished that
we had enough money to have a car and were making the trip ourselves.
But that was something I never had any idea would happen. I had received
an advance of two hundred dollars from Boni and Liveright for a first
book of short stories to be published in America that fall, and I was
selling stories to the _Frankfurter Zeitung_ and to _Der Querschnitt_ in
Berlin and to _This Quarter_ and _The Transatlantic Review_ in Paris and
we were living with great economy and not spending any money except for
necessities in order to save money to go down to the _feria_ at Pamplona
in July and to Madrid and to the _feria_ in Valencia afterwards.

On the morning we were to leave from the Gare de Lyon I arrived in
plenty of time and waited outside the train gates for Scott. He was
bringing the tickets. When it got close to the time for the train to
leave and he had not arrived, I bought an entry ticket to the track and
walked along the side of the train looking for him. I did not see him
and as the long train was about to pull out I got aboard and walked
through the train hoping only that he would be aboard. It was a long
train and he was not on it. I explained the situation to the conductor,
paid for a ticket, second class—there was no third—and asked the
conductor for the name of the best hotel in Lyon. There was nothing to
do but wire Scott from Dijon giving him the address of the hotel where I
would wait for him in Lyon. He would not get it before he left, but his
wife would be presumed to wire it on to him. I had never heard, then, of
a grown man missing a train; but on this trip I was to learn many new
things.

In those days I had a very bad, quick temper, but by the time we were
through Montereau it had quieted down and I was not too angry to watch
and enjoy the countryside and at noon I had a good lunch in the dining
car and drank a bottle of St.-Émilion and thought that even if I had
been a damned fool to accept an invitation for a trip that was to be
paid for by someone else, and was spending money on it that we needed to
go to Spain, it was a good lesson for me. I had never before accepted an
invitation to go on any trip that was paid for, instead of the cost
split, and in this one I had insisted that we split the cost of the
hotels and meals. But now I did not know whether Fitzgerald would even
show up. While I had been angry I had demoted him from Scott to
Fitzgerald. Later I was delighted that I had used up the anger at the
start and gotten it over with. It was not a trip designed for a man easy
to anger.

In Lyon I learned that Scott left Paris for Lyon but had left no word as
to where he was staying. I confirmed my address there and the servant
said she would let him know if he called. Madame was not well and was
still sleeping. I called all the name hotels and left messages but could
not locate Scott and then I went out to a café to have an apéritif and
read the papers. At the café I met a man who ate fire for a living and
also bent coins which he held in his toothless jaws with his thumb and
forefinger. His gums were sore but firm to the eye as he exhibited them
and he said it was not a bad _métier_. I asked him to have a drink and
he was pleased. He had a fine dark face that glowed and shone when he
ate the fire. He said there was no money in eating fire nor in feats of
strength with fingers and jaws in Lyon. False fire-eaters had ruined the
_métier_ and would continue to ruin it wherever they were allowed to
practice. He had been eating fire all evening, he said, and did not have
enough money on him to eat anything else that night. I asked him to have
another drink, to wash away the petrol taste of the fire-eating, and
said we could have dinner together if he knew a good place that was
cheap enough. He said he knew an excellent place.

We ate very cheaply in an Algerian restaurant and I liked the food and
the Algerian wine. The fire-eater was a nice man and it was interesting
to see him eat, as he could chew with his gums as well as most people
can with their teeth. He asked me what I did to make a living and I told
him that I was starting in as a writer. He asked what sort of writing
and I told him stories. He said he knew many stories, some of them more
horrible and incredible than anything that had ever been written. He
could tell them to me and I would write them and then if they made any
money I would give him whatever I thought fair. Better still we could go
to North Africa together and he would take me to the country of the Blue
Sultan where I could get stories such as no man had ever heard.

I asked him what sort of stories and he said battles, executions,
tortures, violations, fearful customs, unbelievable practices,
debaucheries; anything I needed. It was getting time for me to get back
to the hotel and check on Scott again, so I paid for the meal and said
we would certainly be running into each other again. He said he was
working down toward Marseilles and I said sooner or later we would meet
somewhere and it was a pleasure to have dined together. I left him
straightening out bent coins and stacking them on the table and walked
back to the hotel.

Lyon was not a very cheerful town at night. It was a big, heavy,
solid-money town, probably fine if you had money and liked that sort of
town. For years I had heard about the wonderful chicken in the
restaurants there, but we had eaten mutton instead. The mutton had been
excellent.

There was no word from Scott at the hotel and I went to bed in the
unaccustomed luxury of the hotel and read a copy of the first volume of
_A Sportsman’s Sketches_ by Turgenev that I had borrowed from Sylvia
Beach’s library. I had not been in the luxury of a big hotel for three
years and I opened the windows wide and rolled up the pillows under my
shoulders and head and was happy being with Turgenev in Russia until I
was asleep while still reading. I was shaving in the morning getting
ready to go out for breakfast when they called from the desk saying a
gentleman was downstairs to see me.

“Ask him to come up, please,” I said and went on shaving, listening to
the town which had come heavily alive since early morning.

Scott did not come up and I met him down at the desk.

“I’m terribly sorry there was this mix-up,” he said. “If I had only
known what hotel you were going to it would have been simple.”

“That’s all right,” I said. We were going to have a long ride and I was
all for peace. “What train did you come down on?”

“One not long after the one you took. It was a very comfortable train
and we might just as well have come down together.”

“Have you had breakfast?”

“Not yet. I’ve been hunting all over the town for you.”

“That’s a shame,” I said. “Didn’t they tell you at home that I was
here?”

“No. Zelda wasn’t feeling well and I probably shouldn’t have come. The
whole trip has been disastrous so far.”

“Let’s get some breakfast and find the car and roll,” I said.

“That’s fine. Should we have breakfast here?”

“It would be quicker in a café.”

“But we’re sure to get a good breakfast here.”

“All right.”

It was a big American breakfast with ham and eggs and it was very good.
But by the time we had ordered it, waited for it, eaten it, and waited
to pay for it, close to an hour had been lost. It was not until the
waiter came with the bill that Scott decided that we have the hotel make
us a picnic lunch. I tried to argue him out of this as I was sure we
could get a bottle of Mâcon in Mâcon and we could buy something to make
sandwiches in a _charcuterie_. Or, if things were closed when we went
through, there would be any number of restaurants where we could stop on
our way. But he said I had told him that the chicken was wonderful in
Lyon and that we should certainly take one with us. So the hotel made us
a lunch that could not have cost us very much more than four or five
times what it would have cost us if we had bought it ourselves.

Scott had obviously been drinking before I met him and, as he looked as
though he needed a drink, I asked him if he did not want one in the bar
before we set out. He told me he was not a morning drinker and asked if
I was. I told him it depended entirely on how I felt and what I had to
do and he said that if I felt that I needed a drink, he would keep me
company so I would not have to drink alone. So we had a whisky and
Perrier in the bar while we waited for the lunch and both felt much
better.

I paid for the hotel room and the bar, although Scott wanted to pay for
everything. Since the start of the trip I had felt a little complicated
about it emotionally and I found I felt much better the more things I
could pay for. I was using up the money we had saved for Spain, but I
knew I had good credit with Sylvia Beach and could borrow and repay
whatever I was wasting now.

At the garage where Scott had left the car, I was astonished to find
that the small Renault had no top. The top had been damaged in unloading
the car in Marseilles, or it had been damaged in Marseilles in some
manner and Zelda had ordered it cut away and refused to have it
replaced. His wife hated car tops, Scott told me, and without the top
they had driven as far as Lyon where they were halted by the rain. The
car was in fair shape otherwise and Scott paid the bill after disputing
several charges for washing, greasing, and for adding two liters of oil.
The garage man explained to me that the car needed new piston rings and
had evidently been run without sufficient oil and water. He showed me
how it had heated up and burned the paint off the motor. He said if I
could persuade Monsieur to have a ring job done in Paris, the car, which
was a good little car, would be able to give the service it was built
for.

“Monsieur would not let me replace the top.”

“No?”

“One has an obligation to a vehicle.”

“One has.”

“You gentlemen have no waterproofs?”

“No,” I said. “I did not know about the top.”

“Try and make Monsieur be serious,” he said pleadingly. “At least about
the vehicle.”

“Ah,” I said.

We were halted by rain about an hour north of Lyon.

In that day we were halted by rain possibly ten times. They were passing
showers and some of them were longer than others. If we had waterproof
coats it would have been pleasant enough to drive in that spring rain.
As it was we sought the shelter of trees or halted at cafés alongside
the road. We had a marvelous lunch from the hotel at Lyon, an excellent
truffled roast chicken, delicious bread and white Mâcon wine and Scott
was very happy when we drank the white Mâconnais at each of our stops.
At Mâcon I had bought four more bottles of excellent wine which I
uncorked as we needed them.

I am not sure Scott had ever drunk wine from a bottle before and it was
exciting to him as though he were slumming or as a girl might be excited
by going swimming for the first time without a bathing suit. But, by
early afternoon, he had begun to worry about his health. He told me
about two people who had died of congestion of the lungs recently. Both
of them had died in Italy and he had been deeply impressed.

I told him that congestion of the lungs was an old-fashioned term for
pneumonia, and he told me that I knew nothing about it and was
absolutely wrong. Congestion of the lungs was a malady which was
indigenous to Europe and I could not possibly know anything about it
even if I had read my father’s medical books, since they dealt with
diseases that were strictly American. I said that my father had studied
in Europe too. But Scott explained that congestion of the lungs had only
appeared in Europe recently and that my father could not possibly have
known anything about it. He also explained that diseases were different
in different parts of America, and if my father had practiced medicine
in New York instead of in the Middle West, he would have known an
entirely different gamut of diseases. He used the word gamut.

I said that he had a good point in the prevalence of certain diseases in
one part of the United States and their absence in others and cited the
amount of leprosy in New Orleans and its low incidence, then, in
Chicago. But I said that doctors had a system of exchange of knowledge
and information among themselves and now that I remembered it after he
had brought it up, I had read the authoritative article on congestion of
the lungs in Europe in the _Journal of the American Medical Association_
which traced its history back to Hippocrates himself. This held him for
a while and I urged him to take another drink of Mâcon, since a good
white wine, moderately full-bodied but with a low alcoholic content, was
almost a specific against the disease.

Scott cheered a little after this but he began to fail again shortly and
asked me if we would make a big town before the onset of the fever and
delirium by which, I had told him, the true congestion of the lungs,
European, announced itself. I was now translating from an article which
I had read in a French medical journal on the same malady while waiting
at the American Hospital in Neuilly to have my throat cauterized, I told
him. A word like cauterized had a comforting effect on Scott. But he
wanted to know when we would make the town. I said if we pushed on we
should make it in twenty-five minutes to an hour.

Scott then asked me if I were afraid to die and I said more at some
times than at others.

It now began to rain really heavily and we took refuge in the next
village at a café. I cannot remember all the details of that afternoon
but when we were finally in a hotel at what must have been
Châlon-sur-Saône, it was so late that the drug stores were closed. Scott
had undressed and gone to bed as soon as we reached the hotel. He did
not mind dying of congestion of the lungs, he said. It was only the
question of who was to look after Zelda and young Scotty. I did not see
very well how I could look after them since I was having a healthily
rough time looking after my wife Hadley and young son Bumby, but I said
I would do my best and Scott thanked me. I must see that Zelda did not
drink and that Scotty should have an English governess.

We had sent our clothes to be dried and were in our pajamas. It was
still raining outside but it was cheerful in the room with the electric
light on. Scott was lying in bed to conserve his strength for his battle
against the disease. I had taken his pulse, which was seventy-two, and
had felt his forehead, which was cool. I had listened to his chest and
had him breathe deeply, and his chest sounded all right.

“Look, Scott,” I said. “You’re perfectly O.K. If you want to do the best
thing to keep from catching cold, just stay in bed and I’ll order us
each a lemonade and a whisky and you take an aspirin with yours and
you’ll feel fine and won’t even get a cold in your head.”

“Those old wives’ remedies,” Scott said.

“You haven’t any temperature. How the hell are you going to have
congestion of the lungs without a temperature?”

“Don’t swear at me,” Scott said. “How do you know I haven’t a
temperature?”

“Your pulse is normal and you haven’t any fever to the touch.”

“To the touch,” Scott said bitterly. “If you’re a real friend, get me a
thermometer.”

“I’m in pajamas.”

“Send for one.”

I rang for the waiter. He didn’t come and I rang again and then went
down the hallway to look for him. Scott was lying with his eyes closed,
breathing slowly and carefully and, with his waxy color and his perfect
features, he looked like a little dead crusader. I was getting tired of
the literary life, if this was the literary life that I was leading, and
already I missed not working and I felt the death loneliness that comes
at the end of every day that is wasted in your life. I was very tired of
Scott and of this silly comedy, but I found the waiter and gave him
money to buy a thermometer and a tube of aspirin, and ordered two
_citron pressés_ and two double whiskies. I tried to order a bottle of
whisky but they would only sell it by the drink.

Back in the room Scott was still lying as though on his tomb, sculpted
as a monument to himself, his eyes closed and breathing with exemplary
dignity.

Hearing me come in the room, he spoke. “Did you get the thermometer?”

I went over and put my hand on his forehead. It was not as cold as the
tomb. But it was cool and not clammy.

“Nope,” I said.

“I thought you’d brought it.”

“I sent out for it.”

“It’s not the same thing.”

“No. It isn’t, is it?”

You could not be angry with Scott any more than you could be angry with
someone who was crazy, but I was getting angry with myself for having
become involved in the whole silliness. He did have a point though, and
I knew it very well. Most drunkards in those days died of pneumonia, a
disease which has now been almost eliminated. But it was hard to accept
him as a drunkard, since he was affected by such small quantities of
alcohol.

In Europe then we thought of wine as something as healthy and normal as
food and also as a great giver of happiness and well being and delight.
Drinking wine was not a snobbism nor a sign of sophistication nor a
cult; it was as natural as eating and to me as necessary, and I would
not have thought of eating a meal without drinking either wine or cider
or beer. I loved all wines except sweet or sweetish wines and wines that
were too heavy, and it had never occurred to me that sharing a few
bottles of fairly light, dry, white Mâcon could cause chemical changes
in Scott that would turn him into a fool. There had been the whisky and
Perrier in the morning but, in my ignorance of alcoholics then, I could
not imagine one whisky harming anyone who was driving in an open car in
the rain. The alcohol should have been oxidized in a very short time.

While waiting for the waiter to bring the various things I sat and read
a paper and finished one of the bottles of Mâcon that had been uncorked
at the last stop. There are always some splendid crimes in the
newspapers that you follow from day to day, when you live in France.
These crimes read like continued stories and it is necessary to have
read the opening chapters, since there are no summaries provided as
there are in American serial stories and, anyway, no serial is as good
in an American periodical unless you have read the all-important first
chapter. When you are traveling through France the papers are
disappointing because you miss the continuity of the different _crimes_,
_affaires_, or _scandales_, and you miss much of the pleasure to be
derived from reading about them in a café. Tonight I would have much
preferred to be in a café where I might read the morning editions of the
Paris papers and watch the people and drink something a little more
authoritative than the Mâcon in preparation for dinner. But I was riding
herd on Scott so I enjoyed myself where I was.

When the waiter arrived with the two glasses with the pressed lemon
juice and ice, the whiskies, and the bottle of Perrier water, he told me
that the pharmacy was closed and he could not get a thermometer. He had
borrowed some aspirin. I asked him to see if he could borrow a
thermometer. Scott opened his eyes and gave a baleful Irish look at the
waiter.

“Have you told him how serious it is?” he asked.

“I think he understands.”

“Please try to make it clear.”

I tried to make it clear and the waiter said, “I’ll bring what I can.”

“Did you tip him enough to do any good? They only work for tips.”

“I didn’t know that,” I said. “I thought the hotel paid them something
on the side.”

“I mean they will only do something for you for a substantial tip. Most
of them are rotten clean through.”

I thought of Evan Shipman and I thought of the waiter at the Closerie
des Lilas who had been forced to cut his mustache when they made the
American bar at the Closerie, and how Evan had been working out at his
garden in Montrouge long before I had met Scott, and what good friends
we all were and had been for a long time at the Lilas and of all of the
moves that had been made and what they meant to all of us. I thought of
telling Scott about this whole problem of the Lilas, although I had
probably mentioned it to him before, but I knew he did not care about
waiters nor their problems nor their great kindnesses and affections. At
that time Scott hated the French, and since almost the only French he
met with regularly were waiters whom he did not understand,
taxi-drivers, garage employees and landlords, he had many opportunities
to insult and abuse them.

He hated the Italians even more than the French and could not talk about
them calmly even when he was sober. The English he often hated but he
sometimes tolerated them and occasionally looked up to them. I do not
know how he felt about the Germans and the Austrians. I do not know
whether he had ever met any then or any Swiss.

On this evening in the hotel I was delighted that he was being so calm.
I had mixed the lemonade and whisky and given it to him with two
aspirins and he had swallowed the aspirins without protest and with
admirable calm and was sipping his drink. His eyes were open now and
were looking far away. I was reading the _crime_ in the inside of the
paper and was quite happy, too happy it seemed.

“You’re a cold one, aren’t you?” Scott asked and looking at him I saw
that I had been wrong in my prescription, if not in my diagnosis, and
that the whisky was working against us.

“How do you mean, Scott?”

“You can sit there and read that dirty French rag of a paper and it
doesn’t mean a thing to you that I am dying.”

“Do you want me to call a doctor?”

“No. I don’t want a dirty French provincial doctor.”

“What do you want?”

“I want my temperature taken. Then I want my clothes dried and for us to
get on an express train for Paris and to go to the American hospital at
Neuilly.”

“Our clothes won’t be dry until morning and there aren’t any express
trains,” I said. “Why don’t you rest and have some dinner in bed?”

“I want my temperature taken.”

After this went on for a long time the waiter brought a thermometer.

“Is this the only one you could get?” I asked. Scott had shut his eyes
when the waiter came in and he did look at least as far gone as Camille.
I have never seen a man who lost the blood from his face so fast and I
wondered where it went.

“It is the only one in the hotel,” the waiter said and handed me the
thermometer. It was a bath thermometer with a wooden back and enough
metal to sink it in the bath. I took a quick gulp of the whisky sour and
opened the window a moment to look out at the rain. When I turned Scott
was watching me.

I shook the thermometer down professionally and said, “You’re lucky it’s
not a rectal thermometer.”

“Where does this kind go?”

“Under the arm,” I told him and tucked it under my arm.

“Don’t upset the temperature,” Scott said. I shook the thermometer again
with a single sharp downward twitch and unbuttoned his pajama jacket and
put the instrument under his armpit while I felt his cool forehead and
then took his pulse again. He stared straight ahead. The pulse was
seventy-two. I kept the thermometer in for four minutes.

“I thought they only kept them in for one minute,” Scott said.

“This is a big thermometer,” I explained. “You multiply by the square of
the size of the thermometer. It’s a centigrade thermometer.”

Finally I took the thermometer out and carried it over by the reading
light.

“What is it?”

“Thirty-seven and six-tenths.”

“What’s normal?”

“That’s normal.”

“Are you sure?”

“Sure.”

“Try it on yourself. I have to be sure.”

I shook the thermometer down and opened my pajamas and put the
thermometer in my armpit and held it there while I watched the time.
Then I looked at it.

“What is it?” I studied it.

“Exactly the same.”

“How do you feel?”

“Splendid,” I said. I was trying to remember whether thirty-seven six
was really normal or not. It did not matter, for the thermometer,
unaffected, was steady at thirty.

Scott was a little suspicious so I asked if he wanted me to make another
test.

“No,” he said. “We can be happy it cleared up so quickly. I’ve always
had great recuperative power.”

“You’re fine,” I said. “But I think it would be just as well if you
stayed in bed and had a light supper, and then we can start early in the
morning.” I had planned to buy us raincoats but I would have to borrow
money from him for that and I did not want to start arguing about that
now.

Scott did not want to stay in bed. He wanted to get up and get dressed
and go downstairs and call Zelda so she would know he was all right.

“Why would she think you weren’t all right?”

“This is the first night I have ever slept away from her since we were
married and I have to talk to her. You can see what it means to us both,
can’t you?”

I could, but I could not see how he and Zelda could have slept together
on the night just past; but it was nothing to argue about. Scott drank
the whisky sour down very fast now and asked me to order another. I
found the waiter and returned the thermometer and asked him how our
clothes were coming along. He thought they might be dry in an hour or
so. “Have the valet press them and that will dry them. It doesn’t matter
that they should be bone-dry.”

The waiter brought the two drinks against catching cold and I sipped
mine and urged Scott to sip his slowly. I was worried now he might catch
cold and I could see by now that if he ever had anything as definitely
bad as a cold he would probably have to be hospitalized. But the drink
made him feel wonderful for a while and he was happy with the tragic
implications of this being Zelda’s and his first night of separation
since their marriage. Finally he could not wait longer to call her and
put on his dressing gown and went down to put the call through.

It would take some time for the call and shortly after he came up, the
waiter appeared with two more double whisky sours. This was the most I
had ever seen Scott drink until then, but they had no effect on him
except to make him more animated and talkative, and he started to tell
me the outline of his life with Zelda. He told me how he had first met
her during the war and then lost her and won her back, and about their
marriage and then about something tragic that had happened to them at
St.-Raphael about a year ago. This first version that he told me of
Zelda and a French naval aviator falling in love was truly a sad story
and I believe it was a true story. Later he told me other versions of it
as though trying them for use in a novel, but none was as sad as this
first one and I always believed the first one, although any of them
might have been true. They were better told each time; but they never
hurt you the same way the first one did.

Scott was very articulate and told a story well. He did not have to
spell the words nor attempt to punctuate and you did not have the
feeling of reading an illiterate that his letters gave you before they
had been corrected. I knew him for two years before he could spell my
name; but then it was a long name to spell and perhaps it became harder
to spell all of the time, and I give him great credit for spelling it
correctly finally. He learned to spell more important things and he
tried to think straight about many more.

On this night though he wanted me to know and understand and appreciate
what it was that had happened at St.-Raphael and I saw it so clearly
that I could see the single seater seaplane buzzing the diving raft and
the color of the sea and the shape of the pontoons and the shadow that
they cast and Zelda’s tan and Scott’s tan and the dark blonde and the
light blond of their hair and the darkly tanned face of the boy that was
in love with Zelda. I could not ask the question that was in my mind,
how, if this story was true and it had all happened, could Scott have
slept each night in the same bed with Zelda? But maybe that was what had
made it sadder than any story anyone had ever told me then, and, too,
maybe he did not remember, as he did not remember last night.

Our clothes came before the call did and we dressed and went downstairs
to have dinner. Scott was a little unsteady now and he looked at people
out of the side of his eyes with a certain belligerency. We had very
good snails, with a carafe of Fleury to start with and while we were
about halfway through them Scott’s call came. He was gone about an hour
and I ate his snails finally, dipping up the butter, garlic and parsley
sauce with broken bits of bread, and drank the carafe of Fleury. When he
came back I said I would get him some more snails but he said he did not
want any. He wanted something simple. He did not want a steak, nor liver
and bacon, nor an omelette. He would take chicken. We had eaten very
good cold chicken at noon but this was still famous chicken country, so
we had _poularde de Bresse_ and a bottle of Montagny, a light, pleasant
white wine of the neighborhood. Scott ate very little and sipped at one
glass of the wine. He passed out at the table with his head on his
hands. It was natural and there was no theater about it and it even
looked as though he were careful not to spill nor break things. The
waiter and I got him up to his room and laid him on the bed and I
undressed him to his underwear, hung his clothes up, and then stripped
the covers off the bed and spread them over him. I opened the window and
saw it was clear outside and left the window open.

Downstairs I finished my dinner and thought about Scott. It was obvious
he should not drink anything and I had not been taking good care of him.
Anything that he drank seemed to stimulate him too much and then to
poison him and I planned on the next day to cut all drinking to the
minimum. I would tell him that we were getting back to Paris now and
that I had to train in order to write. This was not true. My training
was never to drink after dinner nor before I wrote nor while I was
writing. I went upstairs and opened all the windows wide and undressed
and was asleep almost as soon as I was in bed.

The next day we drove to Paris on a beautiful day up through the Côte
d’Or with the air freshly washed and the hills and the fields and the
vineyards all new, and Scott was very cheerful and happy and healthy and
told me the plots of each and every one of Michael Arlen’s books.
Michael Arlen, he said, was the man you had to watch and he and I could
both learn much from him. I said I could not read the books. He said I
did not have to. He would tell me the plots and describe the characters.
He gave me a sort of oral Ph.D. thesis on Michael Arlen.

I asked him if he had a good connection on the phone when he talked to
Zelda and he said that it was not bad and that they had many things to
talk about. At meals I ordered one bottle of the lightest wine I could
locate and told Scott he would do me a great favor if he would not let
me order any more as I had to train before I wrote and should not under
any circumstances drink more than half a bottle. He co-operated
wonderfully and when he saw me looking nervous toward the end of a
single bottle, gave me some of his share.

When I had left him at his home and taken a taxi back to the sawmill, it
was wonderful to see my wife and we went up to the Closerie des Lilas to
have a drink. We were happy the way children are who have been separated
and are together again and I told her about the trip.

“But didn’t you have any fun or learn anything, Tatie?” she asked.

“I learned about Michael Arlen, if I would have listened, and I learned
things I haven’t sorted out.”

“Isn’t Scott happy at all?”

“Maybe.”

“Poor man.”

“I learned one thing.”

“What?”

“Never to go on trips with anyone you do not love.”

“Isn’t that fine?”

“Yes. And we’re going to Spain.”

“Yes. Now it’s less than six weeks before we go. And this year we won’t
let anyone spoil it, will we?”

“No. And after Pamplona we’ll go to Madrid and to Valencia.”

“M-m-m-m,” she said softly, like a cat.

“Poor Scott,” I said.

“Poor everybody,” Hadley said. “Rich feathercats with no money.”

“We’re awfully lucky.”

“We’ll have to be good and hold it.”

We both touched wood on the café table and the waiter came to see what
it was we wanted. But what we wanted not he, nor anyone else, nor
knocking on wood or on marble, as this café table-top was, could ever
bring us. But we did not know it that night and we were very happy.

A day or two after the trip Scott brought his book over. It had a garish
dust jacket and I remember being embarrassed by the violence, bad taste
and slippery look of it. It looked the book jacket for a book of bad
science fiction. Scott told me not to be put off by it, that it had to
do with a billboard along a highway in Long Island that was important in
the story. He said he had liked the jacket and now he didn’t like it. I
took it off to read the book.

When I had finished the book I knew that no matter what Scott did, nor
how he behaved, I must know it was like a sickness and be of any help I
could to him and try to be a good friend. He had many good, good
friends, more than anyone I knew. But I enlisted as one more, whether I
could be of any use to him or not. If he could write a book as fine as
_The Great Gatsby_ I was sure that he could write an even better one. I
did not know Zelda yet, and so I did not know the terrible odds that
were against him. But we were to find them out soon enough.




                          _Hawks Do Not Share_


Scott Fitzgerald invited us to have lunch with his wife Zelda and his
little daughter at the furnished flat they had rented at 14 rue Tilsitt.
I cannot remember much about the flat except that it was gloomy and
airless and that there was nothing in it that seemed to belong to them
except Scott’s first books bound in light blue leather with the titles
in gold. Scott also showed us a large ledger with all of the stories he
had published listed in it year after year with the prices he had
received for them and also the amounts received for any motion picture
sales, and the sales and royalties of his books. They were all noted as
carefully as the log of a ship and Scott showed them to both of us with
impersonal pride as though he were the curator of a museum. Scott was
nervous and hospitable and he showed us his accounts of his earnings as
though they had been the view. There was no view.

Zelda had a very bad hangover. They had been up on Montmartre the night
before and had quarreled because Scott did not want to get drunk. He had
decided, he told me, to work hard and not to drink and Zelda was
treating him as though he were a kill-joy or a spoilsport. Those were
the two words she used to him and there was recrimination and Zelda
would say, “I did not. I did no such thing. It’s not true, Scott.” Later
she would seem to recall something and would laugh happily.

On this day Zelda did not look her best. Her beautiful dark blonde hair
had been ruined temporarily by a bad permanent she had gotten in Lyon,
when the rain had made them abandon their car, and her eyes were tired
and her face was too taut and drawn.

She was formally pleasant to Hadley and me but a big part of her seemed
not to be present but to still be on the party she had come home from
that morning. She and Scott both seemed to feel that Scott and I had
enjoyed a great and wonderful time on the trip up from Lyon and she was
jealous about it.

“When you two can go off and have such simply wonderful times together,
it only seems fair that I should have just a little fun with our good
friends here in Paris,” she said to Scott.

Scott was being the perfect host and we ate a very bad lunch that the
wine cheered a little but not much. The little girl was blonde,
chubby-faced, well built, and very healthy looking and spoke English
with a strong Cockney accent. Scott explained that she had an English
nanny because he wanted her to speak like Lady Diana Manners when she
grew up.

Zelda had hawk’s eyes and a thin mouth and deep-south manners and
accent. Watching her face you could see her mind leave the table and go
to the night’s party and return with her eyes blank as a cat’s and then
pleased, and the pleasure would show along the thin line of her lips and
then be gone. Scott was being the good cheerful host and Zelda looked at
him and she smiled happily with her eyes and her mouth too as he drank
the wine. I learned to know that smile very well. It meant she knew
Scott would not be able to write.

Zelda was jealous of Scott’s work and as we got to know them, this fell
into a regular pattern. Scott would resolve not to go on all-night
drinking parties and to get some exercise each day and work regularly.
He would start to work and as soon as he was working well Zelda would
begin complaining about how bored she was and get him off on another
drunken party. They would quarrel and then make up and he would sweat
out the alcohol on long walks with me, and make up his mind that this
time he would really work, and would start off well. Then it would start
all over again.

Scott was very much in love with Zelda and he was very jealous of her.
He told me many times on our walks of how she had fallen in love with
the French navy pilot. But she had never made him really jealous with
another man since. This spring she was making him jealous with other
women and on the Montmartre parties he was afraid to pass out and he was
afraid to have her pass out. Becoming unconscious when they drank had
always been their great defense. They went to sleep on drinking an
amount of liquor or champagne that would have little effect on a person
accustomed to drinking, and they would go to sleep like children. I have
seen them become unconscious not as though they were drunk but as though
they had been anesthetized and their friends, or sometimes a
taxi-driver, would get them to bed, and when they woke they would be
fresh and happy, not having taken enough alcohol to damage their bodies
before it made them unconscious.

Now they had lost this natural defense. At this time Zelda could drink
more than Scott could and Scott was afraid for her to pass out in the
company they kept that spring and the places they went to. Scott did not
like the places nor the people and he had to drink more than he could
drink and be in any control of himself, to stand the people and the
places, and then he began to have to drink to keep awake after he would
usually have passed out. Finally he had few intervals of work at all.

He was always trying to work. Each day he would try and fail. He laid
the failure to Paris, the town best organized for a writer to write in
that there is, and he thought always that there would be someplace where
he and Zelda could have a good life together again. He thought of the
Riviera, as it was then before it had all been built up, with the lovely
stretches of blue sea and the sand beaches and the stretches of pine
woods and the mountains of the Esterel going out into the sea. He
remembered it as it was when he and Zelda had first found it before
people went there for the summer.

Scott told me about the Riviera and how my wife and I must come there
the next summer and how we would go there and how he would find a place
for us that was not expensive and we would both work hard every day and
swim and lie on the beach and be brown and only have a single apéritif
before lunch and one before dinner. Zelda would be happy there, he said.
She loved to swim and was a beautiful diver and she was happy with that
life and would want him to work and everything would be disciplined. He
and Zelda and their daughter were going to go there that summer.

I was trying to get him to write his stories as well as he could and not
trick them to conform to any formula, as he had explained that he did.

“You’ve written a fine novel now,” I told him. “And you mustn’t write
slop.”

“The novel isn’t selling,” he said. “I must write stories and they have
to be stories that will sell.”

“Write the best story that you can and write it as straight as you can.”

“I’m going to,” he said.

But the way things were going, he was lucky to get any work done at all.
Zelda did not encourage the people who were chasing her and she had
nothing to do with them, she said. But it amused her and it made Scott
jealous and he had to go with her to the places. It destroyed his work,
and she was more jealous of his work than anything.

All that late spring and early summer Scott fought to work but he could
only work in snatches. When I saw him he was always cheerful, sometimes
desperately cheerful, and he made good jokes and was a good companion.
When he had very bad times, I listened to him about them and tried to
make him know that if he could hold onto himself he would write as he
was made to write, and that only death was irrevocable. He would make
fun of himself then, and as long as he could do that I thought that he
was safe. Through all of this he wrote one good story, “The Rich Boy,”
and I was sure that he could write better than that as he did later.

During the summer we were in Spain and I started the first draft of a
novel and finished it back in Paris in September. Scott and Zelda had
been at Cap d’Antibes, and that fall when I saw him in Paris he was very
changed. He had not done any sobering up on the Riviera and he was drunk
now in the day time as well as nights. It did not make any difference
any more to him that anyone was working and he would come to 113 rue
Notre-Dame-des-Champs any time he was drunk either in the day time or at
night. He had begun to be very rude to his inferiors or anyone he
considered his inferior.

One time he came in through the sawmill gate with his small daughter—it
was the English nurse’s day off and Scott was caring for the child—and
at the foot of the stairs she told him she needed to go to the bathroom.
Scott started to undress her and the proprietor, who lived on the floor
below us, came in and said, “Monsieur, there is a _cabinet de toilette_
just ahead of you to the left of the stairs.”

“Yes, and I’ll put your head in it too, if you’re not careful,” Scott
told him.

He was very difficult all that fall but he had begun to work on a novel
when he was sober. I saw him rarely when he was sober, but when he was
sober he was always pleasant and he still made jokes and sometimes he
would still make jokes about himself. But when he was drunk he would
usually come to find me and, drunk, he took almost as much pleasure
interfering with my work as Zelda did interfering with his. This
continued for years but, for years too, I had no more loyal friend than
Scott when he was sober.

That fall of 1925 he was upset because I would not show him the
manuscript of the first draft of _The Sun Also Rises_. I explained to
him that it would mean nothing until I had gone over it and rewritten it
and that I did not want to discuss it or show it to anyone first. We
were going down to Schruns in the Vorarlberg in Austria as soon as the
first snowfall there.

I rewrote the first half of the manuscript there, finished it in
January, I think. I took it to New York and showed it to Max Perkins of
Scribners and then went back to Schruns and finished rewriting the book.
Scott did not see it until after the completed rewritten and cut
manuscript had been sent to Scribners at the end of April. I remembered
joking with him about it and him being worried and anxious to help as
always once a thing was done. But I did not want his help while I was
rewriting.

While we were living in the Vorarlberg and I was finishing rewriting the
novel, Scott and his wife and child had left Paris for a watering place
in the lower Pyrénées. Zelda had been ill with that familiar intestinal
complaint that too much champagne produces and which was then diagnosed
as colitis. Scott was not drinking, and starting to work and he wanted
us to come to Juan-les-Pins in June. They would find an inexpensive
villa for us and this time he would not drink and it would be like the
old good days and we would swim and be healthy and brown and have one
apéritif before lunch and one before dinner. Zelda was well again and
they were both fine and his novel was going wonderfully. He had money
coming in from a dramatization of _The Great Gatsby_ which was running
well and it would sell to the movies and he had no worries. Zelda was
really fine and everything was going to be disciplined.

I had been down in Madrid in May working by myself and I came by train
from Bayonne to Juan-les-Pins third class and quite hungry because I had
run out of money stupidly and had eaten last in Hendaye at the
French-Spanish frontier. It was a nice villa and Scott had a very fine
house not far away and I was very happy to see my wife who had the villa
running beautifully, and our friends, and the single apéritif before
lunch was very good and we had several more. That night there was a
party to welcome us at the Casino, just a small party, the MacLeishes,
the Murphys, the Fitzgeralds and we who were living at the villa. No one
drank anything stronger than champagne and it was very gay and obviously
a splendid place to write. There was going to be everything that a man
needed to write except to be alone.

Zelda was very beautiful and was tanned a lovely gold color and her hair
was a beautiful dark gold and she was very friendly. Her hawk’s eyes
were clear and calm. I knew everything was all right and was going to
turn out well in the end when she leaned forward and said to me, telling
me her great secret, “Ernest, don’t you think Al Jolson is greater than
Jesus?”

Nobody thought anything of it at the time. It was only Zelda’s secret
that she shared with me, as a hawk might share something with a man. But
hawks do not share. Scott did not write anything any more that was good
until after he knew that she was insane.




                       _A Matter of Measurements_


Much later, in the time after Zelda had what was then called her first
nervous breakdown and we happened to be in Paris at the same time, Scott
asked me to have lunch with him at Michaud’s restaurant on the corner of
the rue Jacob and the rue des Saints-Pères. He said he had something
very important to ask me that meant more than anything in the world to
him and that I must answer absolutely truly. I said that I would do the
best that I could. When he would ask me to tell him something absolutely
truly, which is very difficult to do, and I would try it, what I said
would make him angry, often not when I said it but afterwards, and
sometimes long afterwards when he had brooded on it. My words would
become something that would have to be destroyed and sometimes, if
possible, me with them.

He drank wine at the lunch but it did not affect him and he had not
prepared for the lunch by drinking before it. We talked about our work
and about people and he asked me about people that we had not seen
lately. I knew that he was writing something good and that he was having
great trouble with it for many reasons but that was not what he wanted
to talk about. I kept waiting for it to come, the thing that I had to
tell the absolute truth about; but he would not bring it up until the
end of the meal, as though we were having a business lunch.

Finally when we were eating the cherry tart and had a last carafe of
wine he said, “You know I never slept with anyone except Zelda.”

“No, I didn’t.”

“I thought I had told you.”

“No. You told me a lot of things but not that.”

“That is what I have to ask you about.”

“Good. Go on.”

“Zelda said that the way I was built I could never make any woman happy
and that was what upset her originally. She said it was a matter of
measurements. I have never felt the same since she said that and I have
to know truly.”

“Come out to the office,” I said.

“Where is the office?”

“_Le water_,” I said.

We came back into the room and sat down at the table.

“You’re perfectly fine,” I said. “You are O.K. There’s nothing wrong
with you. You look at yourself from above and you look foreshortened. Go
over to the Louvre and look at the people in the statues and then go
home and look at yourself in the mirror in profile.”

“Those statues may not be accurate.”

“They are pretty good. Most people would settle for them.”

“But why would she say it?”

“To put you out of business. That’s the oldest way in the world of
putting people out of business. Scott, you asked me to tell you the
truth and I can tell you a lot more but this is the absolute truth and
all you need. You could have gone to see a doctor.”

“I didn’t want to. I wanted you to tell me truly.”

“Now do you believe me?”

“I don’t know,” he said.

“Come on over to the Louvre,” I said. “It’s just down the street and
across the river.”

We went over to the Louvre and he looked at the statues but still he was
doubtful about himself.

“It is not basically a question of the size in repose,” I said. “It is
the size that it becomes. It is also a question of angle.” I explained
to him about using a pillow and a few other things that might be useful
for him to know.

“There is one girl,” he said, “who has been very nice to me. But after
what Zelda said—”

“Forget what Zelda said,” I told him. “Zelda is crazy. There’s nothing
wrong with you. Just have confidence and do what the girl wants. Zelda
just wants to destroy you.”

“You don’t know anything about Zelda.”

“All right,” I said. “Let it go at that. But you came to lunch to ask me
a question and I’ve tried to give you an honest answer.”

But he was still doubtful.

“Should we go and see some pictures?” I asked. “Have you ever seen
anything in here except the Mona Lisa?”

“I’m not in the mood for looking at pictures,” he said. “I promised to
meet some people at the Ritz bar.”

Many years later at the Ritz bar, long after the end of the World War
II, Georges, who is the bar chief now and who was the _chasseur_ when
Scott lived in Paris, asked me, “Papa, who was this Monsieur Fitzgerald
that everyone asks me about?”

“Didn’t you know him?”

“No. I remember all of the people of that time. But now they ask me only
about him.”

“What do you tell them?”

“Anything interesting that they wish to hear. What will please them. But
tell me, who was he?”

“He was an American writer of the early Twenties and later who lived
some time in Paris and abroad.”

“But why would I not remember him? Was he a good writer?”

“He wrote two very good books and one which was not completed which
those who know his writing best say would have been very good. He also
wrote some good short stories.”

“Did he frequent the bar much?”

“I believe so.”

“But you did not come to the bar in the early Twenties. I know that you
were poor then and lived in a different quarter.”

“When I had money I went to the Crillon.”

“I know that too. I remember very well when we first met.”

“So do I.”

“It is strange that I have no memory of him,” Georges said.

“All those people are dead.”

“Still one does not forget people because they are dead and people keep
asking me about him. You must tell me something about him for my
memoirs.”

“I will.”

“I remember you and the Baron von Blixen arriving one night—in what
year?” He smiled.

“He is dead too.”

“Yes. But one does not forget him. You see what I mean?”

“His first wife wrote very beautifully,” I said. “She wrote perhaps the
best book about Africa that I ever read. Except Sir Samuel Baker’s book
on the Nile tributaries of Abyssinia. Put that in your memoirs. Since
you are interested in writers now.”

“Good,” said Georges. “The Baron was not a man that you forget. And the
name of the book?”

“_Out of Africa_,” I said. “Blickie was always very proud of his first
wife’s writing. But we knew each other long before she had written that
book.”

“But Monsieur Fitzgerald that they keep asking me about?”

“He was in Frank’s time.”

“Yes. But I was the _chasseur_. You know what a _chasseur_ is.”

“I am going to write something about him in a book that I will write
about the early days in Paris. I promised myself that I would write it.”

“Good,” said Georges.

“I will put him in exactly as I remember him the first time that I met
him.”

“Good,” said Georges. “Then, if he came here, I will remember him. After
all one does not forget people.”

“Tourists?”

“Naturally. But you say he came here very much?”

“It meant very much to him.”

“You write about him as you remember him and then if he came here I will
remember him.”

“We will see,” I said.




                   _There Is Never Any End to Paris_


When there were the three of us instead of just the two, it was the cold
and the weather that finally drove us out of Paris in the winter time.
Alone there was no problem when you got used to it. I could always go to
a café to write and could work all morning over a _café crème_ while the
waiters cleaned and swept out the café and it gradually grew warmer. My
wife could go to work at the piano in a cold place and with enough
sweaters keep warm playing and come home to nurse Bumby. It was wrong to
take a baby to a café in the winter though; even a baby that never cried
and watched everything that happened and was never bored. There were no
baby-sitters then and Bumby would stay happy in his tall cage bed with
his big, loving cat named F. Puss. There were people who said that it
was dangerous to leave a cat with a baby. The most ignorant and
prejudiced said that a cat would suck a baby’s breath and kill him.
Others said that a cat would lie on a baby and the cat’s weight would
smother him. F. Puss lay beside Bumby in the tall cage bed and watched
the door with his big yellow eyes, and would let no one come near him
when we were out and Marie, the _femme de ménage_, had to be away. There
was no need for baby-sitters. F. Puss was the baby-sitter.

But when you are poor, and we were really poor when I had given up all
journalism when we came back from Canada, and could sell no stories at
all, it was too rough with a baby in Paris in the winter. At three
months Mr. Bumby had crossed the North Atlantic on a twelve-day small
Cunarder that sailed from New York via Halifax in January. He never
cried on the trip and laughed happily when he would be barricaded in a
bunk so he could not fall out when we were in heavy weather. But our
Paris was too cold for him.

We went to Schruns in the Vorarlberg in Austria. After going through
Switzerland you came to the Austrian frontier at Feldkirch. The train
went through Liechtenstein and stopped at Bludenz where there was a
small branch line that ran along a pebbly trout river through a valley
of farms and forest to Schruns, which was a sunny market town with
sawmills, stores, inns and a good, year-around hotel called the Taube
where we lived.

The rooms at the Taube were large and comfortable with big stoves, big
windows and big beds with good blankets and feather coverlets. The meals
were simple and excellent and the dining room and the wood-planked
public bar were well heated and friendly. The valley was wide and open
so there was good sun. The pension was about two dollars a day for the
three of us, and as the Austrian schilling went down with inflation, our
room and food were less all the time. There was no desperate inflation
and poverty as there had been in Germany. The schilling went up and
down, but its longer course was down.

There were no ski lifts from Schruns and no funiculars, but there were
logging trails and cattle trails that led up different mountain valleys
to the high mountain country. You climbed on seal skins that you
attached to the bottoms of the skis. At the tops of mountain valleys
there were the big Alpine Club huts for summer climbers where you could
sleep and leave payment for any wood you used. In some you had to pack
up your own wood, or if you were going on a long tour in the high
mountains and the glaciers, you hired someone to pack wood and supplies
up with you, and established a base. The most famous of these high base
huts were the Lindauer-Hütte, the Madlener-Haus and the
Wiesbadener-Hütte.

In back of the Taube there was a sort of practice slope where you ran
through orchards and fields and there was another good slope behind
Tchagguns across the valley where there was a beautiful inn with an
excellent collection of chamois horns on the walls of the drinking room.
It was from behind the lumber village of Tchagguns, which was on the far
edge of the valley, that the good skiing went all the way up until you
could eventually cross the mountains and get over the Silvretta into the
Klosters area.

Schruns was a healthy place for Bumby who had a dark-haired beautiful
girl to take him out in the sun in his sleigh and look after him, and
Hadley and I had all the new country to learn and the new villages, and
the people of the town were very friendly. Herr Walther Lent who was a
pioneer high-mountain skier and at one time had been a partner with
Hannes Schneider, the great Arlberg skier, making ski waxes for climbing
and all snow conditions, was starting a school for Alpine skiing and we
both enrolled. Walther Lent’s system was to get his pupils off the
practice slopes as soon as possible and into the high mountains on
trips. Skiing was not the way it is now, the spiral fracture had not
become common then, and no one could afford a broken leg. There were no
ski patrols. Anything you ran down from, you had to climb up. That gave
you legs that were fit to run down with.

Walther Lent believed the fun of skiing was to get up into the highest
mountain country where there was no one else and where the snow was
untracked and then travel from one high Alpine Club hut to another over
the top passes and glaciers of the Alps. You must not have a binding
that could break your leg if you fell. The ski should come off before it
broke your leg. What he really loved was unroped glacier skiing, but for
that we had to wait until spring when the crevasses were sufficiently
covered.

Hadley and I had loved skiing since we had first tried it together in
Switzerland and later at Cortina d’Ampezzo in the Dolomites when Bumby
was going to be born and the doctor in Milan had given her permission to
continue to ski if I would promise that she would not fall down. This
took a very careful selection of terrain and of runs and absolutely
controlled running, but she had beautiful, wonderfully strong legs and
fine control of her skis, and she did not fall. We all knew the
different snow conditions and everyone knew how to run in deep powder
snow.

We loved the Vorarlberg and we loved Schruns. We would go there about
Thanksgiving time and stay until nearly Easter. There was always skiing
even though Schruns was not high enough for a ski resort except in a
winter of heavy snow. But climbing was fun and no one minded it in those
days. You set a certain pace well under the speed at which you could
climb, and it was easy and your heart felt good and you were proud of
the weight of your rucksack. Part of the climb up to the Madlener-Haus
was steep and very tough. But the second time you made that climb it was
easier, and finally you made it easily with double the weight you had
carried at first.

We were always hungry and every meal time was a great event. We drank
light or dark beer and new wines and wines that were a year old
sometimes. The white wines were the best. For other drinks there was
kirsch made in the valley and Enzian _Schnapps_ distilled from mountain
gentian. Sometimes for dinner there would be jugged hare with a rich red
wine sauce, and sometimes venison with chestnut sauce. We would drink
red wine with these even though it was more expensive than white wine,
and the very best cost twenty cents a liter. Ordinary red wine was much
cheaper and we packed it up in kegs to the Madlener-Haus.

We had a store of books that Sylvia Beach had let us take for the winter
and we could bowl with the people of the town in the alley that gave
onto the summer garden of the hotel. Once or twice a week there was a
poker game in the dining room of the hotel with all the windows
shuttered and the door locked. Gambling was forbidden in Austria then
and I played with Herr Nels, the hotel keeper, Herr Lent of the Alpine
ski school, a banker of the town, the public prosecutor and the captain
of Gendarmerie. It was a stiff game and they were all good poker players
except that Herr Lent played too wildly because the ski school was not
making any money. The captain of Gendarmerie would raise his finger to
his ear when he would hear the pair of gendarmes stop outside the door
when they made their rounds, and we would be silent until they had gone
on.

In the cold of the morning as soon as it was light the maid would come
into the room and shut the windows and make a fire in the big porcelain
stove. Then the room was warm, there was breakfast of fresh bread or
toast with delicious fruit preserves and big bowls of coffee, fresh eggs
and good ham if you wanted it. There was a dog named Schnautz that slept
on the foot of the bed who loved to go on ski trips and to ride on my
back or over my shoulder when I ran down hill. He was Mr. Bumby’s friend
too and would go for walks with him and his nurse beside the small
sleigh.

Schruns was a good place to work. I know because I did the most
difficult job of rewriting I have ever done there in the winter of 1925
and 1926, when I had to take the first draft of _The Sun Also Rises_
which I had written in one sprint of six weeks, and make it into a
novel. I cannot remember what stories I wrote there. There were several
though that turned out well.

I remember the snow on the road to the village squeaking at night when
we walked home in the cold with our skis and ski poles on our shoulders,
watching the lights and then finally seeing the buildings, and how
everyone on the road said, “Grüss Gott.” There were always country men
in the _Weinstube_ with nailed boots and mountain clothes and the air
was smoky and the wooden floors were scarred by the nails. Many of the
young men had served in Austrian Alpine regiments and one named Hans,
who worked in the sawmill, was a famous hunter and we were good friends
because we had been in the same part of the mountains in Italy. We drank
together and we all sang mountain songs.

I remember the trails up through the orchards and the fields of the
hillside farms above the village and the warm farm houses with their
great stoves and the huge wood piles in the snow. The women worked in
the kitchens carding and spinning wool into grey and black yarn. The
spinning wheels worked by a foot treadle and the yarn was not dyed. The
black yarn was from the wool of black sheep. The wool was natural and
the fat had not been removed, and the caps and sweaters and long scarves
that Hadley knitted from it never became wet in the snow.

One Christmas there was a play by Hans Sachs that the school master
directed. It was a good play and I wrote a review of it for the
provincial paper that the hotel keeper translated. Another year a former
German naval officer with a shaven head and scars came to give a lecture
on the Battle of Jutland. The lantern slides showed the movements of the
two battle fleets and the naval officer used a billiard cue for a
pointer when he pointed out the cowardice of Jellicoe and sometimes he
became so angry that his voice broke. The school master was afraid that
he would stab the billiard cue through the screen. Afterwards the former
naval officer could not quiet himself down and everyone was ill at ease
in the _Weinstube_. Only the public prosecutor and the banker drank with
him, and they were at a separate table. Herr Lent, who was a
Rhinelander, would not attend the lecture. There was a couple from
Vienna who had come for the skiing but who did not want to go to the
high mountains and so were leaving for Zurs where, I heard, they were
killed in an avalanche. The man said the lecturer was the type of swine
who had ruined Germany and in twenty years they would do it again. The
woman with him told him to shut up in French and said this is a small
place and you never know.

That was the year that so many people were killed in avalanches. The
first big loss was over the mountains from our valley in Lech in the
Arlberg. A party of Germans wanted to come and ski with Herr Lent on
their Christmas vacations. Snow was late that year and the hills and
mountain slopes were still warm from the sun when a great snowfall came.
The snow was deep and powdery and it was not bound to the earth at all.
Conditions for skiing could not be more dangerous and Herr Lent had
wired the Berliners not to come. But it was their vacation time and they
were ignorant and had no fear of avalanches. They arrived at Lech and
Herr Lent refused to take them out. One man called him a coward and they
said they would ski by themselves. Finally he took them to the safest
slope he could find. He crossed it himself and then they followed and
the whole hillside came down in a rush, rising over them as a tidal wave
rises. Thirteen were dug out and nine of them were dead. The Alpine ski
school had not prospered before this, and afterwards we were almost the
only members. We became great students of avalanches, the different
types of avalanches, how to avoid them and how to behave if you were
caught in one. Most of the writing that I did that year was in avalanche
time.

The worst thing I remember of that avalanche winter was one man who was
dug out. He had squatted down and made a box with his arms in front of
his head, as we had been taught to do, so that there would be air to
breathe as the snow rose up over you. It was a huge avalanche and it
took a long time to dig everyone out, and this man was the last to be
found. He had not been dead long and his neck was worn through so that
the tendons and the bone were visible. He had been turning his head from
side to side against the pressure of the snow. In this avalanche there
must have been some old, packed snow mixed in with the new light snow
that had slipped. We could not decide whether he had done it on purpose
or if he had been out of his head. He was refused burial in consecrated
ground by the local priest anyway, since there was no proof he was a
Catholic.

When we lived in Schruns we used to make a long trip up the valley to
the inn where we slept before setting out on the climb to the
Madlener-Haus. It was a very beautiful old inn and the wood of the walls
of the room where we ate and drank were silky with the years of
polishing. So were the table and chairs. We slept close together in the
big bed under the feather quilt with the window open and the stars close
and very bright. In the morning after breakfast we all loaded to go up
the road and started the climb in the dark with the stars close and very
bright, carrying our skis on our shoulders. The porters’ skis were short
and they carried heavy loads. We competed among ourselves as to who
could climb with the heaviest loads, but no one could compete with the
porters, squat sullen peasants who spoke only Montafon dialect, climbed
steadily like pack horses and at the top, where the Alpine Club hut was
built on a shelf beside the snow-covered glacier, shed their loads
against the stone wall of the hut, asked for more money than the agreed
price, and, when they had obtained a compromise, shot down and away on
their short skis like gnomes.

One of our friends was a German girl who skied with us. She was a great
mountain skier, small and beautifully built, who could carry as heavy a
rucksack as I could and carry it longer.

“Those porters always look at us as though they looked forward to
bringing us down as bodies,” she said. “They set the price for the climb
and I’ve never known them not to ask for more.”

In the winter in Schruns I wore a beard against the sun that burned my
face so badly on the high snow, and did not bother having a haircut.
Late one evening running on skis down the logging trails Herr Lent told
me that peasants I passed on those roads above Schruns called me “the
Black Christ.” He said some, when they came to the _Weinstube_, called
me “the Black Kirsch-drinking Christ.” But to the peasants at the far
upper end of the Montafon where we hired porters to go up to the
Madlener-Haus, we were all foreign devils who went into the high
mountains when people should stay out of them. That we started before
daylight in order not to pass avalanche places when the sun could make
them dangerous was not to our credit. It only proved we were tricky as
all foreign devils are.

I remember the smell of the pines and the sleeping on the mattresses of
beech leaves in the woodcutters’ huts and the skiing through the forest
following the tracks of hares and of foxes. In the high mountains above
the tree line I remember following the track of a fox until I came in
sight of him and watching him stand with his right forefoot raised and
then go carefully to stop and then pounce, and the whiteness and the
clutter of a ptarmigan bursting out of the snow and flying away and over
the ridge.

I remember all the kinds of snow that the wind could make and their
different treacheries when you were on skis. Then there were the
blizzards when you were in the high Alpine hut and the strange world
that they would make where we had to make our route as carefully as
though we had never seen the country. We had not, either, as it all was
new. Finally towards spring there was the great glacier run, smooth and
straight, forever straight if our legs could hold it, our ankles locked,
we running so low, leaning into the speed, dropping forever and forever
in the silent hiss of the crisp powder. It was better than any flying or
anything else, and we built the ability to do it and to have it with the
long climbs carrying the heavy rucksacks. We could not buy the trip up
nor take a ticket to the top. It was the end we worked for all winter,
and all the winter built to make it possible.

During our last year in the mountains new people came deep into our
lives and nothing was ever the same again. The winter of the avalanches
was like a happy and innocent winter in childhood compared to the next
winter, a nightmare winter disguised as the greatest fun of all, and the
murderous summer that was to follow. It was that year that the rich
showed up.

The rich have a sort of pilot fish who goes ahead of them, sometimes a
little deaf, sometimes a little blind, but always smelling affable and
hesitant ahead of them. The pilot fish talks like this: “Well I dont
know. No of course not really. But I like them. I like them both. Yes,
by God, Hem; I do like them. I see what you mean but I do like them
truly and there’s something damned fine about her.” (He gives her name
and pronounces it lovingly.) “No, Hem, dont be silly and dont be
difficult. I like them truly. Both of them I swear it. You’ll like him
(using his baby-talk nickname) when you know him. I like them both,
truly.”

Then you have the rich and nothing is ever as it was again. The pilot
fish leaves of course. He is always going somewhere, or coming from
somewhere, and he is never around for very long. He enters and leaves
politics or the theater in the same way he enters and leaves countries
and people’s lives in his early days. He is never caught and he is not
caught by the rich. Nothing ever catches him and it is only those who
trust him who are caught and killed. He has the irreplaceable early
training of the bastard and a latent and long denied love of money. He
ends up rich himself, having moved one dollar’s width to the right with
every dollar that he made.

These rich loved and trusted him because he was shy, comic, elusive,
already in production, and because he was an unerring pilot fish.

When you have two people who love each other, are happy and gay and
really good work is being done by one or both of them, people are drawn
to them as surely as migrating birds are drawn at night to a powerful
beacon. If the two people were as solidly constructed as the beacon
there would be little damage except to the birds. Those who attract
people by their happiness and their performance are usually
inexperienced. They do not know how not to be overrun and how to go
away. They do not always learn about the good, the attractive, the
charming, the soon-beloved, the generous, the understanding rich who
have no bad qualities and who give each day the quality of a festival
and who, when they have passed and taken the nourishment they needed,
leave everything deader than the roots of any grass Attila’s horses’
hooves have ever scoured.

The rich came led by the pilot fish. A year before they would never have
come. There was no certainty then. The work was as good and the
happiness was greater but no novel had been written, so they could not
be sure. They never wasted their time nor their charm on something that
was not sure. Why should they? Picasso was sure and of course had been
before they had ever heard of painting. They were very sure of another
painter. Many others. But this year they were sure and they had the word
from the pilot fish who turned up too so we would not feel that they
were outlanders and that I would not be difficult. The pilot fish was
our friend of course.

In those days I trusted the pilot fish as I would trust the Corrected
Hydrographic Office Sailing Directions for the Mediterranean, say, or
the tables in _Brown’s Nautical Almanac_. Under the charm of these rich
I was as trusting and as stupid as a bird dog who wants to go out with
any man with a gun, or a trained pig in a circus who has finally found
someone who loves and appreciates him for himself alone. That every day
should be a fiesta seemed to me a marvelous discovery. I even read aloud
the part of the novel that I had rewritten, which is about as low as a
writer can get and much more dangerous for him as a writer than glacier
skiing unroped before the full winter snowfall has set over the
crevices.

When they said, “It’s great, Ernest. Truly it’s great. You cannot know
the thing it has,” I wagged my tail in pleasure and plunged into the
fiesta concept of life to see if I could not bring some fine attractive
stick back, instead of thinking, “If these bastards like it what is
wrong with it?” That was what I would think if I had been functioning as
a professional although, if I had been functioning as a professional, I
would never have read it to them.

Before these rich had come we had already been infiltrated by another
rich using the oldest trick there is. It is that an unmarried young
woman becomes the temporary best friend of another young woman who is
married, goes to live with the husband and wife and then unknowingly,
innocently and unrelentingly sets out to marry the husband. When the
husband is a writer and doing difficult work so that he is occupied much
of the time and is not a good companion or partner to his wife for a big
part of the day, the arrangement has advantages until you know how it
works out. The husband has two attractive girls around when he has
finished work. One is new and strange and if he has bad luck he gets to
love them both.

Then, instead of the two of them and their child, there are three of
them. First it is stimulating and fun and it goes on that way for a
while. All things truly wicked start from an innocence. So you live day
by day and enjoy what you have and do not worry. You lie and hate it and
it destroys you and every day is more dangerous, but you live day to day
as in a war.

It was necessary that I leave Schruns and go to New York to rearrange
publishers. I did my business in New York and when I got back to Paris I
should have caught the first train from the Gare de l’Est that would
take me down to Austria. But the girl I was in love with was in Paris
then, and I did not take the first train, or the second or the third.

When I saw my wife again standing by the tracks as the train came in by
the piled logs at the station, I wished I had died before I ever loved
anyone but her. She was smiling, the sun on her lovely face tanned by
the snow and sun, beautifully built, her hair red gold in the sun, grown
out all winter awkwardly and beautifully, and Mr. Bumby standing with
her, blond and chunky and with winter cheeks looking like a good
Vorarlberg boy.

“Oh Tatie,” she said, when I was holding her in my arms, “you’re back
and you made such a fine successful trip. I love you and we’ve missed
you so.”

I loved her and I loved no one else and we had a lovely magic time while
we were alone. I worked well and we made great trips, and I thought we
were invulnerable again, and it wasn’t until we were out of the
mountains in late spring, and back in Paris that the other thing started
again.

That was the end of the first part of Paris. Paris was never to be the
same again although it was always Paris and you changed as it changed.
We never went back to the Vorarlberg and neither did the rich.

There is never any ending to Paris and the memory of each person who has
lived in it differs from that of any other. We always returned to it no
matter who we were or how it was changed or with what difficulties, or
ease, it could be reached. Paris was always worth it and you received
return for whatever you brought to it. But this is how Paris was in the
early days when we were very poor and very happy. 
 MANUEL GARCIA climbed the stairs to Don Miguel Retana’s office. He set
down his suitcase and knocked on the door. There was no answer. Manuel,
standing in the hallway, felt there was some one in the room. He felt it
through the door.

“Retana,” he said, listening.

There was no answer.

He’s there, all right, Manuel thought.

“Retana,” he said and banged the door.

“Who’s there?” said some one in the office.

“Me, Manolo,” Manuel said.

“What do you want?” asked the voice.

“I want to work,” Manuel said.

Something in the door clicked several times and it swung open. Manuel
went in, carrying his suitcase.

A little man sat behind a desk at the far side of the room. Over his
head was a bull’s head, stuffed by a Madrid taxidermist; on the walls
were framed photographs and bull-fight posters.

The little man sat looking at Manuel.

“I thought they’d killed you,” he said.

Manuel knocked with his knuckles on the desk. The little man sat looking
at him across the desk.

“How many corridas you had this year?” Retana asked.

“One,” he answered.

“Just that one?” the little man asked.

“That’s all.”

“I read about it in the papers,” Retana said. He leaned back in the
chair and looked at Manuel.

Manuel looked up at the stuffed bull. He had seen it often before. He
felt a certain family interest in it. It had killed his brother, the
promising one, about nine years ago. Manuel remembered the day. There
was a brass plate on the oak shield the bull’s head was mounted on.
Manuel could not read it, but he imagined it was in memory of his
brother. Well, he had been a good kid.

The plate said: “The Bull ‘Mariposa’ of the Duke of Veragua, which
accepted 9 varas for 7 caballos, and caused the death of Antonio Garcia,
Novillero, April 27, 1909.”

Retana saw him looking at the stuffed bull’s head.

“The lot the Duke sent me for Sunday will make a scandal,” he said.
“They’re all bad in the legs. What do they say about them at the Café?”

“I don’t know,” Manuel said. “I just got in.”

“Yes,” Retana said. “You still have your bag.”

He looked at Manuel, leaning back behind the big desk.

“Sit down,” he said. “Take off your cap.”

Manuel sat down; his cap off, his face was changed. He looked pale, and
his coleta pinned forward on his head, so that it would not show under
the cap, gave him a strange look.

“You don’t look well,” Retana said.

“I just got out of the hospital,” Manuel said.

“I heard they’d cut your leg off,” Retana said.

“No,” said Manuel. “It got all right.”

Retana leaned forward across the desk and pushed a wooden box of
cigarettes toward Manuel.

“Have a cigarette,” he said.

“Thanks.”

Manuel lit it.

“Smoke?” he said, offering the match to Retana.

“No,” Retana waved his hand, “I never smoke.”

Retana watched him smoking.

“Why don’t you get a job and go to work?” he said.

“I don’t want to work,” Manuel said. “I am a bull-fighter.”

“There aren’t any bull-fighters any more,” Retana said.

“I’m a bull-fighter,” Manuel said.

“Yes, while you’re in there,” Retana said.

Manuel laughed.

Retana sat, saying nothing and looking at Manuel.

“I’ll put you in a nocturnal if you want,” Retana offered.

“When?” Manuel asked.

“To-morrow night.”

“I don’t like to substitute for anybody,” Manuel said. That was the way
they all got killed. That was the way Salvador got killed. He tapped
with his knuckles on the table.

“It’s all I’ve got,” Retana said.

“Why don’t you put me on next week?” Manuel suggested.

“You wouldn’t draw,” Retana said. “All they want is Litri and Rubito and
La Torre. Those kids are good.”

“They’d come to see me get it,” Manuel said, hopefully.

“No, they wouldn’t. They don’t know who you are any more.”

“I’ve got a lot of stuff,” Manuel said.

“I’m offering to put you on to-morrow night,” Retana said. “You can work
with young Hernandez and kill two novillos after the Chariots.”

“Whose novillos?” Manuel asked.

“I don’t know. Whatever stuff they’ve got in the corrals. What the
veterinaries won’t pass in the daytime.”

“I don’t like to substitute,” Manuel said.

“You can take it or leave it,” Retana said. He leaned forward over the
papers. He was no longer interested. The appeal that Manuel had made to
him for a moment when he thought of the old days was gone. He would like
to get him to substitute for Larita because he could get him cheaply. He
could get others cheaply too. He would like to help him though. Still he
had given him the chance. It was up to him.

“How much do I get?” Manuel asked. He was still playing with the idea of
refusing. But he knew he could not refuse.

“Two hundred and fifty pesetas,” Retana said. He had thought of five
hundred, but when he opened his mouth it said two hundred and fifty.

“You pay Villalta seven thousand,” Manuel said.

“You’re not Villalta,” Retana said.

“I know it,” Manuel said.

“He draws it, Manolo,” Retana said in explanation.

“Sure,” said Manuel. He stood up. “Give me three hundred, Retana.”

“All right,” Retana agreed. He reached in the drawer for a paper.

“Can I have fifty now?” Manuel asked.

“Sure,” said Retana. He took a fifty peseta note out of his pocket-book
and laid it, spread out flat, on the table.

Manuel picked it up and put it in his pocket.

“What about a cuadrilla?” he asked.

“There’s the boys that always work for me nights,” Retana said. “They’re
all right.”

“How about picadors?” Manuel asked.

“They’re not much,” Retana admitted.

“I’ve got to have one good pic,” Manuel said.

“Get him then,” Retana said. “Go and get him.”

“Not out of this,” Manuel said. “I’m not paying for any cuadrilla out of
sixty duros.”

Retana said nothing but looked at Manuel across the big desk.

“You know I’ve got to have one good pic,” Manuel said.

Retana said nothing but looked at Manuel from a long way off.

“It isn’t right,” Manuel said.

Retana was still considering him, leaning back in his chair, considering
him from a long way away.

“There’re the regular pics,” he offered.

“I know,” Manuel said. “I know your regular pics.”

Retana did not smile. Manuel knew it was over.

“All I want is an even break,” Manuel said reasoningly. “When I go out
there I want to be able to call my shots on the bull. It only takes one
good picador.”

He was talking to a man who was no longer listening.

“If you want something extra,” Retana said, “go and get it. There will
be a regular cuadrilla out there. Bring as many of your own pics as you
want. The charlotada is over by 10.30.”

“All right,” Manuel said. “If that’s the way you feel about it.”

“That’s the way,” Retana said.

“I’ll see you to-morrow night,” Manuel said.

“I’ll be out there,” Retana said.

Manuel picked up his suitcase and went out.

“Shut the door,” Retana called.

Manuel looked back. Retana was sitting forward looking at some papers.
Manuel pulled the door tight until it clicked.

He went down the stairs and out of the door into the hot brightness of
the street. It was very hot in the street and the light on the white
buildings was sudden and hard on his eyes. He walked down the shady side
of the steep street toward the Puerta del Sol. The shade felt solid and
cool as running water. The heat came suddenly as he crossed the
intersecting streets. Manuel saw no one he knew in all the people he
passed.

Just before the Puerta del Sol he turned into a café.

It was quiet in the café. There were a few men sitting at tables against
the wall. At one table four men played cards. Most of the men sat
against the wall smoking, empty coffee-cups and liqueur-glasses before
them on the tables. Manuel went through the long room to a small room in
back. A man sat at a table in the corner asleep. Manuel sat down at one
of the tables.

A waiter came in and stood beside Manuel’s table.

“Have you seen Zurito?” Manuel asked him.

“He was in before lunch,” the waiter answered. “He won’t be back before
five o’clock.”

“Bring me some coffee and milk and a shot of the ordinary,” Manuel said.

The waiter came back into the room carrying a tray with a big
coffee-glass and a liqueur-glass on it. In his left hand he held a
bottle of brandy. He swung these down to the table and a boy who had
followed him poured coffee and milk into the glass from two shiny,
spouted pots with long handles.

Manuel took off his cap and the waiter noticed his pigtail pinned
forward on his head. He winked at the coffee-boy as he poured out the
brandy into the little glass beside Manuel’s coffee. The coffee-boy
looked at Manuel’s pale face curiously.

“You fighting here?” asked the waiter, corking up the bottle.

“Yes,” Manuel said. “To-morrow.”

The waiter stood there, holding the bottle on one hip.

“You in the Charlie Chaplins?” he asked.

The coffee-boy looked away, embarrassed.

“No. In the ordinary.”

“I thought they were going to have Chaves and Hernandez,” the waiter
said.

“No. Me and another.”

“Who? Chaves or Hernandez?”

“Hernandez, I think.”

“What’s the matter with Chaves?”

“He got hurt.”

“Where did you hear that?”

“Retana.”

“Hey, Looie,” the waiter called to the next room, “Chaves got cogida.”

Manuel had taken the wrapper off the lumps of sugar and dropped them
into his coffee. He stirred it and drank it down, sweet, hot, and
warming in his empty stomach. He drank off the brandy.

“Give me another shot of that,” he said to the waiter.

The waiter uncorked the bottle and poured the glass full, slopping
another drink into the saucer. Another waiter had come up in front of
the table. The coffee-boy was gone.

“Is Chaves hurt bad?” the second waiter asked Manuel.

“I don’t know,” Manuel said, “Retana didn’t say.”

“A hell of a lot he cares,” the tall waiter said. Manuel had not seen
him before. He must have just come up.

“If you stand in with Retana in this town, you’re a made man,” the tall
waiter said. “If you aren’t in with him, you might just as well go out
and shoot yourself.”

“You said it,” the other waiter who had come in said. “You said it
then.”

“You’re right I said it,” said the tall waiter. “I know what I’m talking
about when I talk about that bird.”

“Look what he’s done for Villalta,” the first waiter said.

“And that ain’t all,” the tall waiter said. “Look what he’s done for
Marcial Lalanda. Look what he’s done for Nacional.”

“You said it, kid,” agreed the short waiter.

Manuel looked at them, standing talking in front of his table. He had
drunk his second brandy. They had forgotten about him. They were not
interested in him.

“Look at that bunch of camels,” the tall waiter went on. “Did you ever
see this Nacional II?”

“I seen him last Sunday didn’t I?” the original waiter said.

“He’s a giraffe,” the short waiter said.

“What did I tell you?” the tall waiter said. “Those are Retana’s boys.”

“Say, give me another shot of that,” Manuel said. He had poured the
brandy the waiter had slopped over in the saucer into his glass and
drank it while they were talking.

The original waiter poured his glass full mechanically, and the three of
them went out of the room talking.

In the far corner the man was still asleep, snoring slightly on the
intaking breath, his head back against the wall.

Manuel drank his brandy. He felt sleepy himself. It was too hot to go
out into the town. Besides there was nothing to do. He wanted to see
Zurito. He would go to sleep while he waited. He kicked his suitcase
under the table to be sure it was there. Perhaps it would be better to
put it back under the seat, against the wall. He leaned down and shoved
it under. Then he leaned forward on the table and went to sleep.

When he woke there was some one sitting across the table from him. It
was a big man with a heavy brown face like an Indian. He had been
sitting there some time. He had waved the waiter away and sat reading
the paper and occasionally looking down at Manuel, asleep, his head on
the table. He read the paper laboriously, forming the words with his
lips as he read. When it tired him he looked at Manuel. He sat heavily
in the chair, his black Cordoba hat tipped forward.

Manuel sat up and looked at him.

“Hello, Zurito,” he said.

“Hello, kid,” the big man said.

“I’ve been asleep.” Manuel rubbed his forehead with the back of his
fist.

“I thought maybe you were.”

“How’s everything?”

“Good. How is everything with you?”

“Not so good.”

They were both silent. Zurito, the picador, looked at Manuel’s white
face. Manuel looked down at the picador’s enormous hands folding the
paper to put away in his pocket.

“I got a favor to ask you, Manos,” Manuel said.

Manosduros was Zurito’s nickname. He never heard it without thinking of
his huge hands. He put them forward on the table self-consciously.

“Let’s have a drink,” he said.

“Sure,” said Manuel.

The waiter came and went and came again. He went out of the room looking
back at the two men at the table.

“What’s the matter, Manolo?” Zurito set down his glass.

“Would you pic two bulls for me to-morrow night?” Manuel asked, looking
up at Zurito across the table.

“No,” said Zurito. “I’m not pic-ing.”

Manuel looked down at his glass. He had expected that answer; now he had
it. Well, he had it.

“I’m sorry, Manolo, but I’m not pic-ing.” Zurito looked at his hands.

“That’s all right,” Manuel said.

“I’m too old,” Zurito said.

“I just asked you,” Manuel said.

“Is it the nocturnal to-morrow?”

“That’s it. I figured if I had just one good pic, I could get away with
it.”

“How much are you getting?”

“Three hundred pesetas.”

“I get more than that for pic-ing.”

“I know,” said Manuel. “I didn’t have any right to ask you.”

“What do you keep on doing it for?” Zurito asked. “Why don’t you cut off
your coleta, Manolo?”

“I don’t know,” Manuel said.

“You’re pretty near as old as I am,” Zurito said.

“I don’t know,” Manuel said. “I got to do it. If I can fix it so that I
get an even break, that’s all I want. I got to stick with it, Manos.”

“No, you don’t.”

“Yes, I do. I’ve tried keeping away from it.”

“I know how you feel. But it isn’t right. You ought to get out and stay
out.”

“I can’t do it. Besides, I’ve been going good lately.”

Zurito looked at his face.

“You’ve been in the hospital.”

“But I was going great when I got hurt.”

Zurito said nothing. He tipped the cognac out of his saucer into his
glass.

“The papers said they never saw a better faena,” Manuel said.

Zurito looked at him.

“You know when I get going I’m good,” Manuel said.

“You’re too old,” the picador said.

“No,” said Manuel. “You’re ten years older than I am.”

“With me it’s different.”

“I’m not too old,” Manuel said.

They sat silent, Manuel watching the picador’s face.

“I was going great till I got hurt,” Manuel offered.

“You ought to have seen me, Manos,” Manuel said, reproachfully.

“I don’t want to see you,” Zurito said. “It makes me nervous.”

“You haven’t seen me lately.”

“I’ve seen you plenty.”

Zurito looked at Manuel, avoiding his eyes.

“You ought to quit it, Manolo.”

“I can’t,” Manuel said. “I’m going good now, I tell you.”

Zurito leaned forward, his hands on the table.

“Listen. I’ll pic for you and if you don’t go big to-morrow night,
you’ll quit. See? Will you do that?”

“Sure.”

Zurito leaned back, relieved.

“You got to quit,” he said. “No monkey business. You got to cut the
coleta.”

“I won’t have to quit,” Manuel said. “You watch me. I’ve got the stuff.”

Zurito stood up. He felt tired from arguing.

“You got to quit,” he said. “I’ll cut your coleta myself.”

“No, you won’t,” Manuel said. “You won’t have a chance.”

Zurito called the waiter.

“Come on,” said Zurito. “Come on up to the house.”

Manuel reached under the seat for his suitcase. He was happy. He knew
Zurito would pic for him. He was the best picador living. It was all
simple now.

“Come on up to the house and we’ll eat,” Zurito said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Manuel stood in the patio de caballos waiting for the Charlie Chaplins
to be over. Zurito stood beside him. Where they stood it was dark. The
high door that led into the bull-ring was shut. Above them they heard a
shout, then another shout of laughter. Then there was silence. Manuel
liked the smell of the stables about the patio de caballos. It smelt
good in the dark. There was another roar from the arena and then
applause, prolonged applause, going on and on.

“You ever seen these fellows?” Zurito asked, big and looming beside
Manuel in the dark.

“No,” Manuel said.

“They’re pretty funny.” Zurito said. He smiled to himself in the dark.

The high, double, tight-fitting door into the bull-ring swung open and
Manuel saw the ring in the hard light of the arc-lights, the plaza, dark
all the way around, rising high; around the edge of the ring were
running and bowing two men dressed like tramps, followed by a third in
the uniform of a hotel bell-boy who stooped and picked up the hats and
canes thrown down onto the sand and tossed them back up into the
darkness.

The electric light went on in the patio.

“I’ll climb onto one of those ponies while you collect the kids,” Zurito
said.

Behind them came the jingle of the mules, coming out to go into the
arena and be hitched onto the dead bull.

The members of the cuadrilla, who had been watching the burlesque from
the runway between the barrera and the seats, came walking back and
stood in a group talking, under the electric light in the patio. A
good-looking lad in a silver-and-orange suit came up to Manuel and
smiled.

“I’m Hernandez,” he said and put out his hand.

Manuel shook it.

“They’re regular elephants we’ve got to-night,” the boy said cheerfully.

“They’re big ones with horns,” Manuel agreed.

“You drew the worst lot,” the boy said.

“That’s all right,” Manuel said. “The bigger they are, the more meat for
the poor.”

“Where did you get that one?” Hernandez grinned.

“That’s an old one,” Manuel said. “You line up your cuadrilla, so I can
see what I’ve got.”

“You’ve got some good kids,” Hernandez said. He was very cheerful. He
had been on twice before in nocturnals and was beginning to get a
following in Madrid. He was happy the fight would start in a few
minutes.

“Where are the pics?” Manuel asked.

“They’re back in the corrals fighting about who gets the beautiful
horses,” Hernandez grinned.

The mules came through the gate in a rush, the whips snapping, bells
jangling and the young bull ploughing a furrow of sand.

They formed up for the paseo as soon as the bull had gone through.

Manuel and Hernandez stood in front. The youths of the cuadrillas were
behind, their heavy capes furled over their arms. In back, the four
picadors, mounted, holding their steel-tipped push-poles erect in the
half-dark of the corral.

“It’s a wonder Retana wouldn’t give us enough light to see the horses
by,” one picador said.

“He knows we’ll be happier if we don’t get too good a look at these
skins,” another pic answered.

“This thing I’m on barely keeps me off the ground,” the first picador
said.

“Well, they’re horses.”

“Sure, they’re horses.”

They talked, sitting their gaunt horses in the dark.

Zurito said nothing. He had the only steady horse of the lot. He had
tried him, wheeling him in the corrals and he responded to the bit and
the spurs. He had taken the bandage off his right eye and cut the
strings where they had tied his ears tight shut at the base. He was a
good, solid horse, solid on his legs. That was all he needed. He
intended to ride him all through the corrida. He had already, since he
had mounted, sitting in the half-dark in the big, quilted saddle,
waiting for the paseo, pic-ed through the whole corrida in his mind. The
other picadors went on talking on both sides of him. He did not hear
them.

The two matadors stood together in front of their three peones, their
capes furled over their left arms in the same fashion. Manuel was
thinking about the three lads in back of him. They were all three
Madrileños, like Hernandez, boys about nineteen. One of them, a gypsy,
serious, aloof, and dark-faced, he liked the look of. He turned.

“What’s your name, kid?” he asked the gypsy.

“Fuentes,” the gypsy said.

“That’s a good name,” Manuel said.

The gypsy smiled, showing his teeth.

“You take the bull and give him a little run when he comes out,” Manuel
said.

“All right,” the gypsy said. His face was serious. He began to think
about just what he would do.

“Here she goes,” Manuel said to Hernandez.

“All right. We’ll go.”

Heads up, swinging with the music, their right arms swinging free, they
stepped out, crossing the sanded arena under the arc-lights, the
cuadrillas opening out behind, the picadors riding after, behind came
the bull-ring servants and the jingling mules. The crowd applauded
Hernandez as they marched across the arena. Arrogant, swinging, they
looked straight ahead as they marched.

They bowed before the president, and the procession broke up into its
component parts. The bull-fighters went over to the barrera and changed
their heavy mantles for the light fighting capes. The mules went out.
The picadors galloped jerkily around the ring, and two rode out the gate
they had come in by. The servants swept the sand smooth.

Manuel drank a glass of water poured for him by one of Retana’s
deputies, who was acting as his manager and sword-handler. Hernandez
came over from speaking with his own manager.

“You got a good hand, kid,” Manuel complimented him.

“They like me,” Hernandez said happily.

“How did the paseo go?” Manuel asked Retana’s man.

“Like a wedding,” said the handler. “Fine. You came out like Joselito
and Belmonte.”

Zurito rode by, a bulky equestrian statue. He wheeled his horse and
faced him toward the toril on the far side of the ring where the bull
would come out. It was strange under the arc-light. He pic-ed in the hot
afternoon sun for big money. He didn’t like this arc-light business. He
wished they would get started.

Manuel went up to him.

“Pic him, Manos,” he said. “Cut him down to size for me.”

“I’ll pic him, kid,” Zurito spat on the sand. “I’ll make him jump out of
the ring.”

“Lean on him, Manos,” Manuel said.

“I’ll lean on him,” Zurito said. “What’s holding it up?”

“He’s coming now,” Manuel said.

Zurito sat there, his feet in the box-stirrups, his great legs in the
buckskin-covered armor gripping the horse, the reins in his left hand,
the long pic held in his right hand, his broad hat well down over his
eyes to shade them from the lights, watching the distant door of the
toril. His horse’s ears quivered. Zurito patted him with his left hand.

The red door of the toril swung back and for a moment Zurito looked into
the empty passageway far across the arena. Then the bull came out in a
rush, skidding on his four legs as he came out under the lights, then
charging in a gallop, moving softly in a fast gallop, silent except as
he woofed through wide nostrils as he charged, glad to be free after the
dark pen.

In the first row of seats, slightly bored, leaning forward to write on
the cement wall in front of his knees, the substitute bull-fight critic
of _El Heraldo_ scribbled: “Campagnero, Negro, 42, came out at 90 miles
an hour with plenty of gas——”

Manuel, leaning against the barrera, watching the bull, waved his hand
and the gypsy ran out, trailing his cape. The bull, in full gallop,
pivoted and charged the cape, his head down, his tail rising. The gypsy
moved in a zigzag, and as he passed, the bull caught sight of him and
abandoned the cape to charge the man. The gyp sprinted and vaulted the
red fence of the barrera as the bull struck it with his horns. He tossed
into it twice with his horns, banging into the wood blindly.

The critic of _El Heraldo_ lit a cigarette and tossed the match at the
bull, then wrote in his note-book, “large and with enough horns to
satisfy the cash customers, Campagnero showed a tendency to cut into the
terrane of the bull-fighters.”

Manuel stepped out on the hard sand as the bull banged into the fence.
Out of the corner of his eye he saw Zurito sitting the white horse close
to the barrera, about a quarter of the way around the ring to the left.
Manuel held the cape close in front of him, a fold in each hand, and
shouted at the bull. “Huh! Huh!” The bull turned, seemed to brace
against the fence as he charged in a scramble, driving into the cape as
Manuel side-stepped, pivoted on his heels with the charge of the bull,
and swung the cape just ahead of the horns. At the end of the swing he
was facing the bull again and held the cape in the same position close
in front of his body, and pivoted again as the bull recharged. Each
time, as he swung, the crowd shouted.

Four times he swung with the bull, lifting the cape so it billowed full,
and each time bringing the bull around to charge again. Then, at the end
of the fifth swing, he held the cape against his hip and pivoted, so the
cape swung out like a ballet dancer’s skirt and wound the bull around
himself like a belt, to step clear, leaving the bull facing Zurito on
the white horse, come up and planted firm, the horse facing the bull,
its ears forward, its lips nervous, Zurito, his hat over his eyes,
leaning forward, the long pole sticking out before and behind in a sharp
angle under his right arm, held half-way down, the triangular iron point
facing the bull.

_El Heraldo’s_ second-string critic, drawing on his cigarette, his eyes
on the bull, wrote: “the veteran Manolo designed a series of acceptable
veronicas, ending in a very Belmontistic recorte that earned applause
from the regulars, and we entered the tercio of the cavalry.”

Zurito sat his horse, measuring the distance between the bull and the
end of the pic. As he looked, the bull gathered himself together and
charged, his eyes on the horse’s chest. As he lowered his head to hook,
Zurito sunk the point of the pic in the swelling hump of muscle above
the bull’s shoulder, leaned all his weight on the shaft, and with his
left hand pulled the white horse into the air, front hoofs pawing, and
swung him to the right as he pushed the bull under and through so the
horns passed safely under the horse’s belly and the horse came down,
quivering, the bull’s tail brushing his chest as he charged the cape
Hernandez offered him.

Hernandez ran sideways, taking the bull out and away with the cape,
toward the other picador. He fixed him with a swing of the cape,
squarely facing the horse and rider, and stepped back. As the bull saw
the horse he charged. The picador’s lance slid along his back, and as
the shock of the charge lifted the horse, the picador was already
half-way out of the saddle, lifting his right leg clear as he missed
with the lance and falling to the left side to keep the horse between
him and the bull. The horse, lifted and gored, crashed over with the
bull driving into him, the picador gave a shove with his boots against
the horse and lay clear, waiting to be lifted and hauled away and put on
his feet.

Manuel let the bull drive into the fallen horse; he was in no hurry, the
picador was safe; besides, it did a picador like that good to worry.
He’d stay on longer next time. Lousy pics! He looked across the sand at
Zurito a little way out from the barrera, his horse rigid, waiting.

“Huh!” he called to the bull, “Tomar!” holding the cape in both hands so
it would catch his eye. The bull detached himself from the horse and
charged the cape, and Manuel, running sideways and holding the cape
spread wide, stopped, swung on his heels, and brought the bull sharply
around facing Zurito.

“Campagnero accepted a pair of varas for the death of one rosinante,
with Hernandez and Manolo at the quites,” _El Heraldo’s_ critic wrote.
“He pressed on the iron and clearly showed he was no horse-lover. The
veteran Zurito resurrected some of his old stuff with the pike-pole,
notably the suerte——”

“Olé Olé!” the man sitting beside him shouted. The shout was lost in the
roar of the crowd, and he slapped the critic on the back. The critic
looked up to see Zurito, directly below him, leaning far out over his
horse, the length of the pic rising in a sharp angle under his armpit,
holding the pic almost by the point, bearing down with all his weight,
holding the bull off, the bull pushing and driving to get at the horse,
and Zurito, far out, on top of him, holding him, holding him, and slowly
pivoting the horse against the pressure, so that at last he was clear.
Zurito felt the moment when the horse was clear and the bull could come
past, and relaxed the absolute steel lock of his resistance, and the
triangular steel point of the pic ripped in the bull’s hump of shoulder
muscle as he tore loose to find Hernandez’s cape before his muzzle. He
charged blindly into the cape and the boy took him out into the open
arena.

Zurito sat patting his horse and looking at the bull charging the cape
that Hernandez swung for him out under the bright light while the crowd
shouted.

“You see that one?” he said to Manuel.

“It was a wonder,” Manuel said.

“I got him that time,” Zurito said. “Look at him now.”

At the conclusion of a closely turned pass of the cape the bull slid to
his knees. He was up at once, but far out across the sand Manuel and
Zurito saw the shine of the pumping flow of blood, smooth against the
black of the bull’s shoulder.

“I got him that time,” Zurito said.

“He’s a good bull,” Manuel said.

“If they gave me another shot at him, I’d kill him,” Zurito said.

“They’ll change the thirds on us,” Manuel said.

“Look at him now,” Zurito said.

“I got to go over there,” Manuel said, and started on a run for the
other side of the ring, where the monos were leading a horse out by the
bridle toward the bull, whacking him on the legs with rods and all, in a
procession, trying to get him toward the bull, who stood, dropping his
head, pawing, unable to make up his mind to charge.

Zurito, sitting his horse, walking him toward the scene, not missing any
detail, scowled.

Finally the bull charged, the horse leaders ran for the barrera, the
picador hit too far back, and the bull got under the horse, lifted him,
threw him onto his back.

Zurito watched. The monos, in their red shirts, running out to drag the
picador clear. The picador, now on his feet, swearing and flopping his
arms. Manuel and Hernandez standing ready with their capes. And the
bull, the great, black bull, with a horse on his back, hooves dangling,
the bridle caught in the horns. Black bull with a horse on his back,
staggering short-legged, then arching his neck and lifting, thrusting,
charging to slide the horse off, horse sliding down. Then the bull into
a lunging charge at the cape Manuel spread for him.

The bull was slower now, Manuel felt. He was bleeding badly. There was a
sheen of blood all down his flank.

Manuel offered him the cape again. There he came, eyes open, ugly,
watching the cape. Manuel stepped to the side and raised his arms,
tightening the cape ahead of the bull for the veronica.

Now he was facing the bull. Yes, his head was going down a little. He
was carrying it lower. That was Zurito.

Manuel flopped the cape; there he comes; he side-stepped and swung in
another veronica. He’s shooting awfully accurately, he thought. He’s had
enough fight, so he’s watching now. He’s hunting now. Got his eye on me.
But I always give him the cape.

He shook the cape at the bull; there he comes; he side-stepped. Awful
close that time. I don’t want to work that close to him.

The edge of the cape was wet with blood where it had swept along the
bull’s back as he went by.

All right, here’s the last one.

Manuel, facing the bull, having turned with him each charge, offered the
cape with his two hands. The bull looked at him. Eyes watching, horns
straight forward, the bull looked at him, watching.

“Huh!” Manuel said, “Toro!” and leaning back, swung the cape forward.
Here he comes. He side-stepped, swung the cape in back of him, and
pivoted, so the bull followed a swirl of cape and then was left with
nothing, fixed by the pass, dominated by the cape. Manuel swung the cape
under his muzzle with one hand, to show the bull was fixed, and walked
away.

There was no applause.

Manuel walked across the sand toward the barrera, while Zurito rode out
of the ring. The trumpet had blown to change the act to the planting of
the banderillos while Manuel had been working with the bull. He had not
consciously noticed it. The monos were spreading canvas over the two
dead horses and sprinkling sawdust around them.

Manuel came up to the barrera for a drink of water. Retana’s man handed
him the heavy porous jug.

Fuentes, the tall gypsy, was standing holding a pair of banderillos,
holding them together, slim, red sticks, fish-hook points out. He looked
at Manuel.

“Go on out there,” Manuel said.

The gypsy trotted out. Manuel set down the jug and watched. He wiped his
face with his handkerchief.

The critic of _El Heraldo_ reached for the bottle of warm champagne that
stood between his feet, took a drink, and finished his paragraph.

“—the aged Manolo rated no applause for a vulgar series of lances with
the cape and we entered the third of the palings.”

Alone in the centre of the ring the bull stood, still fixed. Fuentes,
tall, flat-backed, walking toward him arrogantly, his arms spread out,
the two slim, red sticks, one in each hand, held by the fingers, points
straight forward. Fuentes walked forward. Back of him and to one side
was a peon with a cape. The bull looked at him and was no longer fixed.

His eyes watched Fuentes, now standing still. Now he leaned back,
calling to him. Fuentes twitched the two banderillos and the light on
the steel points caught the bull’s eye.

His tail went up and he charged.

He came straight, his eyes on the man. Fuentes stood still, leaning
back, the banderillos pointing forward. As the bull lowered his head to
hook, Fuentes leaned backward, his arms came together and rose, his two
hands touching, the banderillos two descending red lines, and leaning
forward drove the points into the bull’s shoulder, leaning far in over
the bull’s horns and pivoting on the two upright sticks, his legs tight
together, his body curving to one side to let the bull pass.

“Olé!” from the crowd.

The bull was hooking wildly, jumping like a trout, all four feet off the
ground. The red shaft of the banderillos tossed as he jumped.

Manuel standing at the barrera, noticed that he hooked always to the
right.

“Tell him to drop the next pair on the right,” he said to the kid who
started to run out to Fuentes with the new banderillos.

A heavy hand fell on his shoulder. It was Zurito.

“How do you feel, kid?” he asked.

Manuel was watching the bull.

Zurito leaned forward on the barrera, leaning the weight of his body on
his arms. Manuel turned to him.

“You’re going good,” Zurito said.

Manuel shook his head. He had nothing to do now until the next third.
The gypsy was very good with the banderillos. The bull would come to him
in the next third in good shape. He was a good bull. It had all been
easy up to now. The final stuff with the sword was all he worried over.
He did not really worry. He did not even think about it. But standing
there he had a heavy sense of apprehension. He looked out at the bull,
planning his faena, his work with the red cloth that was to reduce the
bull, to make him manageable.

The gypsy was walking out toward the bull again, walking heel-and-toe,
insultingly, like a ball-room dancer, the red shafts of the banderillos
twitching with his walk. The bull watched him, not fixed now, hunting
him, but waiting to get close enough so he could be sure of getting him,
getting the horns into him.

As Fuentes walked forward the bull charged. Fuentes ran across the
quarter of a circle as the bull charged and, as he passed running
backward, stopped, swung forward, rose on his toes, arms straight out,
and sunk the banderillos straight down into the tight of the big
shoulder muscles as the bull missed him.

The crowd were wild about it.

“That kid won’t stay in this night stuff long,” Retana’s man said to
Zurito.

“He’s good,” Zurito said.

“Watch him now.”

They watched.

Fuentes was standing with his back against the barrera. Two of the
cuadrilla were back of him, with their capes ready to flop over the
fence to distract the bull.

The bull, with his tongue out, his barrel heaving, was watching the
gypsy. He thought he had him now. Back against the red planks. Only a
short charge away. The bull watched him.

The gypsy bent back, drew back his arms, the banderillos pointing at the
bull. He called to the bull, stamped one foot. The bull was suspicious.
He wanted the man. No more barbs in the shoulder.

Fuentes walked a little closer to the bull. Bent back. Called again.
Somebody in the crowd shouted a warning.

“He’s too damn close,” Zurito said.

“Watch him,” Retana’s man said.

Leaning back, inciting the bull with the banderillos, Fuentes jumped,
both feet off the ground. As he jumped the bull’s tail rose and he
charged. Fuentes came down on his toes, arms straight out, whole body
arching forward, and drove the shafts straight down as he swung his body
clear of the right horn.

The bull crashed into the barrera where the flopping capes had attracted
his eye as he lost the man.

The gypsy came running along the barrera toward Manuel, taking the
applause of the crowd. His vest was ripped where he had not quite
cleared the point of the horn. He was happy about it, showing it to the
spectators. He made the tour of the ring. Zurito saw him go by, smiling,
pointing at his vest. He smiled.

Somebody else was planting the last pair of banderillos. Nobody was
paying any attention.

Retana’s man tucked a baton inside the red cloth of a muleta, folded the
cloth over it, and handed it over the barrera to Manuel. He reached in
the leather sword-case, took out a sword, and holding it by its leather
scabbard, reached it over the fence to Manuel. Manuel pulled the blade
out by the red hilt and the scabbard fell limp.

He looked at Zurito. The big man saw he was sweating.

“Now you get him, kid,” Zurito said.

Manuel nodded.

“He’s in good shape,” Zurito said.

“Just like you want him,” Retana’s man assured him.

Manuel nodded.

The trumpeter, up under the roof, blew for the final act, and Manuel
walked across the arena toward where, up in the dark boxes, the
president must be.

In the front row of seats the substitute bull-fight critic of _El
Heraldo_ took a long drink of the warm champagne. He had decided it was
not worth while to write a running story and would write up the corrida
back in the office. What the hell was it anyway? Only a nocturnal. If he
missed anything he would get it out of the morning papers. He took
another drink of the champagne. He had a date at Maxim’s at twelve. Who
were these bull-fighters anyway? Kids and bums. A bunch of bums. He put
his pad of paper in his pocket and looked over toward Manuel, standing
very much alone in the ring, gesturing with his hat in a salute toward a
box he could not see high up in the dark plaza. Out in the ring the bull
stood quiet, looking at nothing.

“I dedicate this bull to you, Mr. President, and to the public of
Madrid, the most intelligent and generous of the world,” was what Manuel
was saying. It was a formula. He said it all. It was a little long for
nocturnal use.

He bowed at the dark, straightened, tossed his hat over his shoulder,
and, carrying the muleta in his left hand and the sword in his right,
walked out toward the bull.

Manuel walked toward the bull. The bull looked at him; his eyes were
quick. Manuel noticed the way the banderillos hung down on his left
shoulder and the steady sheen of blood from Zurito’s pic-ing. He noticed
the way the bull’s feet were. As he walked forward, holding the muleta
in his left hand and the sword in his right, he watched the bull’s feet.
The bull could not charge without gathering his feet together. Now he
stood square on them, dully.

Manuel walked toward him, watching his feet. This was all right. He
could do this. He must work to get the bull’s head down, so he could go
in past the horns and kill him. He did not think about the sword, not
about killing the bull. He thought about one thing at a time. The coming
things oppressed him, though. Walking forward, watching the bull’s feet,
he saw successively his eyes, his wet muzzle, and the wide,
forward-pointing spread of his horns. The bull had light circles about
his eyes. His eyes watched Manuel. He felt he was going to get this
little one with the white face.

Standing still now and spreading the red cloth of the muleta with the
sword, pricking the point into the cloth so that the sword, now held in
his left hand, spread the red flannel like the jib of a boat, Manuel
noticed the points of the bull’s horns. One of them was splintered from
banging against the barrera. The other was sharp as a porcupine quill.
Manuel noticed while spreading the muleta that the white base of the
horn was stained red. While he noticed these things he did not lose
sight of the bull’s feet. The bull watched Manuel steadily.

He’s on the defensive now, Manuel thought. He’s reserving himself. I’ve
got to bring him out of that and get his head down. Always get his head
down. Zurito had his head down once, but he’s come back. He’ll bleed
when I start him going and that will bring it down.

Holding the muleta, with the sword in his left hand widening it in front
of him, he called to the bull.

The bull looked at him.

He leaned back insultingly and shook the wide-spread flannel.

The bull saw the muleta. It was a bright scarlet under the arc-light.
The bull’s legs tightened.

Here he comes. Whoosh! Manuel turned as the bull came and raised the
muleta so that it passed over the bull’s horns and swept down his broad
back from head to tail. The bull had gone clean up in the air with the
charge. Manuel had not moved.

At the end of the pass the bull turned like a cat coming around a corner
and faced Manuel.

He was on the offensive again. His heaviness was gone. Manuel noted the
fresh blood shining down the black shoulder and dripping down the bull’s
leg. He drew the sword out of the muleta and held it in his right hand.
The muleta held low down in his left hand, leaning toward the left, he
called to the bull. The bull’s legs tightened, his eyes on the muleta.
Here he comes, Manuel thought. Yuh!

He swung with the charge, sweeping the muleta ahead of the bull, his
feet firm, the sword following the curve, a point of light under the
arcs.

The bull recharged as the pase natural finished and Manuel raised the
muleta for a pase de pecho. Firmly planted, the bull came by his chest
under the raised muleta. Manuel leaned his head back to avoid the
clattering banderillo shafts. The hot, black bull body touched his chest
as it passed.

Too damn close, Manuel thought. Zurito, leaning on the barrera, spoke
rapidly to the gypsy, who trotted out toward Manuel with a cape. Zurito
pulled his hat down low and looked out across the arena at Manuel.

Manuel was facing the bull again, the muleta held low and to the left.
The bull’s head was down as he watched the muleta.

“If it was Belmonte doing that stuff, they’d go crazy,” Retana’s man
said.

Zurito said nothing. He was watching Manuel out in the centre of the
arena.

“Where did the boss dig this fellow up?” Retana’s man asked.

“Out of the hospital,” Zurito said.

“That’s where he’s going damn quick,” Retana’s man said.

Zurito turned on him.

“Knock on that,” he said, pointing to the barrera.

“I was just kidding, man,” Retana’s man said.

“Knock on the wood.”

Retana’s man leaned forward and knocked three times on the barrera.

“Watch the faena,” Zurito said.

Out in the centre of the ring, under the lights, Manuel was kneeling,
facing the bull, and as he raised the muleta in both hands the bull
charged, tail up.

Manuel swung his body clear and, as the bull recharged, brought around
the muleta in a half-circle that pulled the bull to his knees.

“Why, that one’s a great bull-fighter,” Retana’s man said.

“No, he’s not,” said Zurito.

Manuel stood up and, the muleta in his left hand, the sword in his
right, acknowledged the applause from the dark plaza.

The bull had humped himself up from his knees and stood waiting, his
head hung low.

Zurito spoke to two of the other lads of the cuadrilla and they ran out
to stand back of Manuel with their capes. There were four men back of
him now. Hernandez had followed him since he first came out with the
muleta. Fuentes stood watching, his cape held against his body, tall, in
repose, watching lazy-eyed. Now the two came up. Hernandez motioned them
to stand one at each side. Manuel stood alone, facing the bull.

Manuel waved back the men with the capes. Stepping back cautiously, they
saw his face was white and sweating.

Didn’t they know enough to keep back? Did they want to catch the bull’s
eye with the capes after he was fixed and ready? He had enough to worry
about without that kind of thing.

The bull was standing, his four feet square, looking at the muleta.
Manuel furled the muleta in his left hand. The bull’s eyes watched it.
His body was heavy on his feet. He carried his head low, but not too
low.

Manuel lifted the muleta at him. The bull did not move. Only his eyes
watched.

He’s all lead, Manuel thought. He’s all square. He’s framed right. He’ll
take it.

He thought in bull-fight terms. Sometimes he had a thought and the
particular piece of slang would not come into his mind and he could not
realize the thought. His instincts and his knowledge worked
automatically, and his brain worked slowly and in words. He knew all
about bulls. He did not have to think about them. He just did the right
thing. His eyes noted things and his body performed the necessary
measures without thought. If he thought about it, he would be gone.

Now, facing the bull, he was conscious of many things at the same time.
There were the horns, the one splintered, the other smoothly sharp, the
need to profile himself toward the left horn, lance himself short and
straight, lower the muleta so the bull would follow it, and, going in
over the horns, put the sword all the way into a little spot about as
big as a five-peseta piece straight in back of the neck, between the
sharp pitch of the bull’s shoulders. He must do all this and must then
come out from between the horns. He was conscious he must do all this,
but his only thought was in words: “Corto y derecho.”

“Corto y derecho,” he thought, furling the muleta. Short and straight.
Corto y derecho, he drew the sword out of the muleta, profiled on the
splintered left horn, dropped the muleta across his body, so his right
hand with the sword on the level with his eye made the sign of the
cross, and, rising on his toes, sighted along the dipping blade of the
sword at the spot high up between the bull’s shoulders.

Corto y derecho he lanced himself on the bull.

There was a shock, and he felt himself go up in the air. He pushed on
the sword as he went up and over, and it flew out of his hand. He hit
the ground and the bull was on him. Manuel, lying on the ground, kicked
at the bull’s muzzle with his slippered feet. Kicking, kicking, the bull
after him, missing him in his excitement, bumping him with his head,
driving the horns into the sand. Kicking like a man keeping a ball in
the air, Manuel kept the bull from getting a clean thrust at him.

Manuel felt the wind on his back from the capes flopping at the bull,
and then the bull was gone, gone over him in a rush. Dark, as his belly
went over. Not even stepped on.

Manuel stood up and picked up the muleta. Fuentes handed him the sword.
It was bent where it had struck the shoulder-blade. Manuel straightened
it on his knee and ran toward the bull, standing now beside one of the
dead horses. As he ran, his jacket flopped where it had been ripped
under his armpit.

“Get him out of there,” Manuel shouted to the gypsy. The bull had
smelled the blood of the dead horse and ripped into the canvas-cover
with his horns. He charged Fuentes’s cape, with the canvas hanging from
his splintered horn, and the crowd laughed. Out in the ring, he tossed
his head to rid himself of the canvas. Hernandez, running up from behind
him, grabbed the end of the canvas and neatly lifted it off the horn.

The bull followed it in a half-charge and stopped still. He was on the
defensive again. Manuel was walking toward him with the sword and
muleta. Manuel swung the muleta before him. The bull would not charge.

Manuel profiled toward the bull, sighting along the dipping blade of the
sword. The bull was motionless, seemingly dead on his feet, incapable of
another charge.

Manuel rose to his toes, sighting along the steel, and charged.

Again there was the shock and he felt himself being borne back in a
rush, to strike hard on the sand. There was no chance of kicking this
time. The bull was on top of him. Manuel lay as though dead, his head on
his arms, and the bull bumped him. Bumped his back, bumped his face in
the sand. He felt the horn go into the sand between his folded arms. The
bull hit him in the small of the back. His face drove into the sand. The
horn drove through one of his sleeves and the bull ripped it off. Manuel
was tossed clear and the bull followed the capes.

Manuel got up, found the sword and muleta, tried the point of the sword
with his thumb, and then ran toward the barrera for a new sword.

Retana’s man handed him the sword over the edge of the barrera.

“Wipe off your face,” he said.

Manuel, running again toward the bull, wiped his bloody face with his
handkerchief. He had not seen Zurito. Where was Zurito?

The cuadrilla had stepped away from the bull and waited with their
capes. The bull stood, heavy and dull again after the action.

Manuel walked toward him with the muleta. He stopped and shook it. The
bull did not respond. He passed it right and left, left and right before
the bull’s muzzle. The bull’s eyes watched it and turned with the swing,
but he would not charge. He was waiting for Manuel.

Manuel was worried. There was nothing to do but go in. Corto y derecho.
He profiled close to the bull, crossed the muleta in front of his body
and charged. As he pushed in the sword, he jerked his body to the left
to clear the horn. The bull passed him and the sword shot up in the air,
twinkling under the arc-lights, to fall red-hilted on the sand.

Manuel ran over and picked it up. It was bent and he straightened it
over his knee.

As he came running toward the bull, fixed again now, he passed Hernandez
standing with his cape.

“He’s all bone,” the boy said encouragingly.

Manuel nodded, wiping his face. He put the bloody handkerchief in his
pocket.

There was the bull. He was close to the barrera now. Damn him. Maybe he
was all bone. Maybe there was not any place for the sword to go in. The
hell there wasn’t! He’d show them.

He tried a pass with the muleta and the bull did not move. Manuel
chopped the muleta back and forth in front of the bull. Nothing doing.

He furled the muleta, drew the sword out, profiled and drove in on the
bull. He felt the sword buckle as he shoved it in, leaning his weight on
it, and then it shot high in the air, end-over-ending into the crowd.
Manuel had jerked clear as the sword jumped.

The first cushions thrown down out of the dark missed him. Then one hit
him in the face, his bloody face looking toward the crowd. They were
coming down fast. Spotting the sand. Somebody threw an empty
champagne-bottle from close range. It hit Manuel on the foot. He stood
there watching the dark, where the things were coming from. Then
something whished through the air and struck by him. Manuel leaned over
and picked it up. It was his sword. He straightened it over his knee and
gestured with it to the crowd.

“Thank you,” he said. “Thank you.”

Oh, the dirty bastards! Dirty bastards! Oh, the lousy, dirty bastards!
He kicked into a cushion as he ran.

There was the bull. The same as ever. All right, you dirty, lousy
bastard!

Manuel passed the muleta in front of the bull’s black muzzle.

Nothing doing.

You won’t! All right. He stepped close and jammed the sharp peak of the
muleta into the bull’s damp muzzle.

The bull was on him as he jumped back and as he tripped on a cushion he
felt the horn go into him, into his side. He grabbed the horn with his
two hands and rode backward, holding tight onto the place. The bull
tossed him and he was clear. He lay still. It was all right. The bull
was gone.

He got up coughing and feeling broken and gone. The dirty bastards!

“Give me the sword,” he shouted. “Give me the stuff.”

Fuentes came up with the muleta and the sword.

Hernandez put his arm around him.

“Go on to the infirmary, man,” he said. “Don’t be a damn fool.”

“Get away from me,” Manuel said. “Get to hell away from me.”

He twisted free. Hernandez shrugged his shoulders. Manuel ran toward the
bull.

There was the bull standing, heavy, firmly planted.

All right, you bastard! Manuel drew the sword out of the muleta, sighted
with the same movement, and flung himself onto the bull. He felt the
sword go in all the way. Right up to the guard. Four fingers and his
thumb into the bull. The blood was hot on his knuckles, and he was on
top of the bull.

The bull lurched with him as he lay on, and seemed to sink; then he was
standing clear. He looked at the bull going down slowly over on his
side, then suddenly four feet in the air.

Then he gestured at the crowd, his hand warm from the bull blood.

All right, you bastards! He wanted to say something, but he started to
cough. It was hot and choking. He looked down for the muleta. He must go
over and salute the president. President hell! He was sitting down
looking at something. It was the bull. His four feet up. Thick tongue
out. Things crawling around on his belly and under his legs. Crawling
where the hair was thin. Dead bull. To hell with the bull! To hell with
them all! He started to get to his feet and commenced to cough. He sat
down again, coughing. Somebody came and pushed him up.

They carried him across the ring to the infirmary, running with him
across the sand, standing blocked at the gate as the mules came in, then
around under the dark passageway, men grunting as they took him up the
stairway, and then laid him down.

The doctor and two men in white were waiting for him. They laid him out
on the table. They were cutting away his shirt. Manuel felt tired. His
whole chest felt scalding inside. He started to cough and they held
something to his mouth. Everybody was very busy.

There was an electric light in his eyes. He shut his eyes.

He heard some one coming very heavily up the stairs. Then he did not
hear it. Then he heard a noise far off. That was the crowd. Well,
somebody would have to kill his other bull. They had cut away all his
shirt. The doctor smiled at him. There was Retana.

“Hello, Retana!” Manuel said. He could not hear his voice.

Retana smiled at him and said something. Manuel could not hear it.

Zurito stood beside the table, bending over where the doctor was
working. He was in his picador clothes, without his hat.

Zurito said something to him. Manuel could not hear it.

Zurito was speaking to Retana. One of the men in white smiled and handed
Retana a pair of scissors. Retana gave them to Zurito. Zurito said
something to Manuel. He could not hear it.

To hell with this operating-table! He’d been on plenty of
operating-tables before. He was not going to die. There would be a
priest if he was going to die.

Zurito was saying something to him. Holding up the scissors.

That was it. They were going to cut off his coleta. They were going to
cut off his pigtail.

Manuel sat up on the operating-table. The doctor stepped back, angry.
Some one grabbed him and held him.

“You couldn’t do a thing like that, Manos,” he said.

He heard suddenly, clearly, Zurito’s voice.

“That’s all right,” Zurito said. “I won’t do it. I was joking.”

“I was going good,” Manuel said. “I didn’t have any luck. That was all.”

Manuel lay back. They had put something over his face. It was all
familiar. He inhaled deeply. He felt very tired. He was very, very
tired. They took the thing away from his face.

“I was going good,” Manuel said weakly. “I was going great.”

Retana looked at Zurito and started for the door.

“I’ll stay here with him,” Zurito said.

Retana shrugged his shoulders.

Manuel opened his eyes and looked at Zurito.

“Wasn’t I going good, Manos?” he asked, for confirmation.

“Sure,” said Zurito. “You were going great.”

The doctor’s assistant put the cone over Manuel’s face and he inhaled
deeply. Zurito stood awkwardly, watching.




                           IN ANOTHER COUNTRY


IN the fall the war was always there, but we did not go to it any more.
It was cold in the fall in Milan and the dark came very early. Then the
electric lights came on, and it was pleasant along the streets looking
in the windows. There was much game hanging outside the shops, and the
snow powdered in the fur of the foxes and the wind blew their tails. The
deer hung stiff and heavy and empty, and small birds blew in the wind
and the wind turned their feathers. It was a cold fall and the wind came
down from the mountains.

We were all at the hospital every afternoon, and there were different
ways of walking across the town through the dusk to the hospital. Two of
the ways were alongside canals, but they were long. Always, though, you
crossed a bridge across a canal to enter the hospital. There was a
choice of three bridges. On one of them a woman sold roasted chestnuts.
It was warm, standing in front of her charcoal fire, and the chestnuts
were warm afterward in your pocket. The hospital was very old and very
beautiful, and you entered through a gate and walked across a courtyard
and out a gate on the other side. There were usually funerals starting
from the courtyard. Beyond the old hospital were the new brick
pavilions, and there we met every afternoon and were all very polite and
interested in what was the matter, and sat in the machines that were to
make so much difference.

The doctor came up to the machine where I was sitting and said: “What
did you like best to do before the war? Did you practise a sport?”

I said: “Yes, football.”

“Good,” he said. “You will be able to play football again better than
ever.”

My knee did not bend and the leg dropped straight from the knee to the
ankle without a calf, and the machine was to bend the knee and make it
move as in riding a tricycle. But it did not bend yet, and instead the
machine lurched when it came to the bending part. The doctor said: “That
will all pass. You are a fortunate young man. You will play football
again like a champion.”

In the next machine was a major who had a little hand like a baby’s. He
winked at me when the doctor examined his hand, which was between two
leather straps that bounced up and down and flapped the stiff fingers,
and said: “And will I too play football, captain-doctor?” He had been a
very great fencer, and before the war the greatest fencer in Italy.

The doctor went to his office in a back room and brought a photograph
which showed a hand that had been withered almost as small as the
major’s, before it had taken a machine course, and after was a little
larger. The major held the photograph with his good hand and looked at
it very carefully. “A wound?” he asked.

“An industrial accident,” the doctor said.

“Very interesting, very interesting,” the major said, and handed it back
to the doctor.

“You have confidence?”

“No,” said the major.

There were three boys who came each day who were about the same age I
was. They were all three from Milan, and one of them was to be a lawyer,
and one was to be a painter, and one had intended to be a soldier, and
after we were finished with the machines, sometimes we walked back
together to the Café Cova, which was next door to the Scala. We walked
the short way through the communist quarter because we were four
together. The people hated us because we were officers, and from a
wine-shop some one would call out, “A basso gli ufficiali!” as we
passed. Another boy who walked with us sometimes and made us five wore a
black silk handkerchief across his face because he had no nose then and
his face was to be rebuilt. He had gone out to the front from the
military academy and been wounded within an hour after he had gone into
the front line for the first time. They rebuilt his face, but he came
from a very old family and they could never get the nose exactly right.
He went to South America and worked in a bank. But this was a long time
ago, and then we did not any of us know how it was going to be
afterward. We only knew then that there was always the war, but that we
were not going to it any more.

We all had the same medals, except the boy with the black silk bandage
across his face, and he had not been at the front long enough to get any
medals. The tall boy with a very pale face who was to be a lawyer had
been a lieutenant of Arditi and had three medals of the sort we each had
only one of. He had lived a very long time with death and was a little
detached. We were all a little detached, and there was nothing that held
us together except that we met every afternoon at the hospital.
Although, as we walked to the Cova through the tough part of town,
walking in the dark, with light and singing coming out of the
wine-shops, and sometimes having to walk into the street when the men
and women would crowd together on the sidewalk so that we would have had
to jostle them to get by, we felt held together by there being something
that had happened that they, the people who disliked us, did not
understand.

We ourselves all understood the Cova, where it was rich and warm and not
too brightly lighted, and noisy and smoky at certain hours, and there
were always girls at the tables and the illustrated papers on a rack on
the wall. The girls at the Cova were very patriotic, and I found that
the most patriotic people in Italy were the café girls—and I believe
they are still patriotic.

The boys at first were very polite about my medals and asked me what I
had done to get them. I showed them the papers, which were written in
very beautiful language and full of _fratellanza_ and _abnegazione_, but
which really said, with the adjectives removed, that I had been given
the medals because I was an American. After that their manner changed a
little toward me, although I was their friend against outsiders. I was a
friend, but I was never really one of them after they had read the
citations, because it had been different with them and they had done
very different things to get their medals. I had been wounded, it was
true; but we all knew that being wounded, after all, was really an
accident. I was never ashamed of the ribbons, though, and sometimes,
after the cocktail hour, I would imagine myself having done all the
things they had done to get their medals; but walking home at night
through the empty streets with the cold wind and all the shops closed,
trying to keep near the street lights, I knew that I would never have
done such things, and I was very much afraid to die, and often lay in
bed at night by myself, afraid to die and wondering how I would be when
I went back to the front again.

The three with the medals were like hunting-hawks; and I was not a hawk,
although I might seem a hawk to those who had never hunted; they, the
three, knew better and so we drifted apart. But I stayed good friends
with the boy who had been wounded his first day at the front, because he
would never know now how he would have turned out; so he could never be
accepted either, and I liked him because I thought perhaps he would not
have turned out to be a hawk either.

The major, who had been the great fencer, did not believe in bravery,
and spent much time while we sat in the machines correcting my grammar.
He had complimented me on how I spoke Italian, and we talked together
very easily. One day I had said that Italian seemed such an easy
language to me that I could not take a great interest in it; everything
was so easy to say. “Ah, yes,” the major said. “Why, then, do you not
take up the use of grammar?” So we took up the use of grammar, and soon
Italian was such a difficult language that I was afraid to talk to him
until I had the grammar straight in my mind.

The major came very regularly to the hospital. I do not think he ever
missed a day, although I am sure he did not believe in the machines.
There was a time when none of us believed in the machines, and one day
the major said it was all nonsense. The machines were new then and it
was we who were to prove them. It was an idiotic idea, he said, “a
theory, like another.” I had not learned my grammar, and he said I was a
stupid impossible disgrace, and he was a fool to have bothered with me.
He was a small man and he sat straight up in his chair with his right
hand thrust into the machine and looked straight ahead at the wall while
the straps thumped up and down with his fingers in them.

“What will you do when the war is over if it is over?” he asked me.
“Speak grammatically!”

“I will go to the States.”

“Are you married?”

“No, but I hope to be.”

“The more of a fool you are,” he said. He seemed very angry. “A man must
not marry.”

“Why, Signor Maggiore?”

“Don’t call me ‘Signor Maggiore.’”

“Why must not a man marry?”

“He cannot marry. He cannot marry,” he said angrily. “If he is to lose
everything, he should not place himself in a position to lose that. He
should not place himself in a position to lose. He should find things he
cannot lose.”

He spoke very angrily and bitterly, and looked straight ahead while he
talked.

“But why should he necessarily lose it?”

“He’ll lose it,” the major said. He was looking at the wall. Then he
looked down at the machine and jerked his little hand out from between
the straps and slapped it hard against his thigh. “He’ll lose it,” he
almost shouted. “Don’t argue with me!” Then he called to the attendant
who ran the machines. “Come and turn this damned thing off.”

He went back into the other room for the light treatment and the
massage. Then I heard him ask the doctor if he might use his telephone
and he shut the door. When he came back into the room, I was sitting in
another machine. He was wearing his cape and had his cap on, and he came
directly toward my machine and put his arm on my shoulder.

“I am so sorry,” he said, and patted me on the shoulder with his good
hand. “I would not be rude. My wife has just died. You must forgive me.”

“Oh—” I said, feeling sick for him. “I am _so_ sorry.”

He stood there biting his lower lip. “It is very difficult,” he said. “I
cannot resign myself.”

He looked straight past me and out through the window. Then he began to
cry. “I am utterly unable to resign myself,” he said and choked. And
then crying, his head up looking at nothing, carrying himself straight
and soldierly, with tears on both his cheeks and biting his lips, he
walked past the machines and out the door.

The doctor told me that the major’s wife, who was very young and whom he
had not married until he was definitely invalided out of the war, had
died of pneumonia. She had been sick only a few days. No one expected
her to die. The major did not come to the hospital for three days. Then
he came at the usual hour, wearing a black band on the sleeve of his
uniform. When he came back, there were large framed photographs around
the wall, of all sorts of wounds before and after they had been cured by
the machines. In front of the machine the major used were three
photographs of hands like his that were completely restored. I do not
know where the doctor got them. I always understood we were the first to
use the machines. The photographs did not make much difference to the
major because he only looked out of the window.




                       HILLS LIKE WHITE ELEPHANTS


THE hills across the valley of the Ebro were long and white. On this
side there was no shade and no trees and the station was between two
lines of rails in the sun. Close against the side of the station there
was the warm shadow of the building and a curtain, made of strings of
bamboo beads, hung across the open door into the bar, to keep out flies.
The American and the girl with him sat at a table in the shade, outside
the building. It was very hot and the express from Barcelona would come
in forty minutes. It stopped at this junction for two minutes and went
on to Madrid.

“What should we drink?” the girl asked. She had taken off her hat and
put it on the table.

“It’s pretty hot,” the man said.

“Let’s drink beer.”

“Dos cervezas,” the man said into the curtain.

“Big ones?” a woman asked from the doorway.

“Yes. Two big ones.”

The woman brought two glasses of beer and two felt pads. She put the
felt pads and the beer glasses on the table and looked at the man and
the girl. The girl was looking off at the line of hills. They were white
in the sun and the country was brown and dry.

“They look like white elephants,” she said.

“I’ve never seen one,” the man drank his beer.

“No, you wouldn’t have.”

“I might have,” the man said. “Just because you say I wouldn’t have
doesn’t prove anything.”

The girl looked at the bead curtain. “They’ve painted something on it,”
she said. “What does it say?”

“Anis del Toro. It’s a drink.”

“Could we try it?”

The man called “Listen” through the curtain. The woman came out from the
bar.

“Four reales.”

“We want two Anis del Toro.”

“With water?”

“Do you want it with water?”

“I don’t know,” the girl said. “Is it good with water?”

“It’s all right.”

“You want them with water?” asked the woman.

“Yes, with water.”

“It tastes like licorice,” the girl said and put the glass down.

“That’s the way with everything.”

“Yes,” said the girl. “Everything tastes of licorice. Especially all the
things you’ve waited so long for, like absinthe.”

“Oh, cut it out.”

“You started it,” the girl said. “I was being amused. I was having a
fine time.”

“Well, let’s try and have a fine time.”

“All right. I was trying. I said the mountains looked like white
elephants. Wasn’t that bright?”

“That was bright.”

“I wanted to try this new drink. That’s all we do, isn’t it—look at
things and try new drinks?”

“I guess so.”

The girl looked across at the hills.

“They’re lovely hills,” she said. “They don’t really look like white
elephants. I just meant the coloring of their skin through the trees.”

“Should we have another drink?”

“All right.”

The warm wind blew the bead curtain against the table.

“The beer’s nice and cool,” the man said.

“It’s lovely,” the girl said.

“It’s really an awfully simple operation, Jig,” the man said. “It’s not
really an operation at all.”

The girl looked at the ground the table legs rested on.

“I know you wouldn’t mind it, Jig. It’s really not anything. It’s just
to let the air in.”

The girl did not say anything.

“I’ll go with you and I’ll stay with you all the time. They just let the
air in and then it’s all perfectly natural.”

“Then what will we do afterward?”

“We’ll be fine afterward. Just like we were before.”

“What makes you think so?”

“That’s the only thing that bothers us. It’s the only thing that’s made
us unhappy.”

The girl looked at the bead curtain, put her hand out and took hold of
two of the strings of beads.

“And you think then we’ll be all right and be happy.”

“I know we will. You don’t have to be afraid. I’ve known lots of people
that have done it.”

“So have I,” said the girl. “And afterward they were all so happy.”

“Well,” the man said, “if you don’t want to you don’t have to. I
wouldn’t have you do it if you didn’t want to. But I know it’s perfectly
simple.”

“And you really want to?”

“I think it’s the best thing to do. But I don’t want you to do it if you
don’t really want to.”

“And if I do it you’ll be happy and things will be like they were and
you’ll love me?”

“I love you now. You know I love you.”

“I know. But if I do it, then it will be nice again if I say things are
like white elephants, and you’ll like it?”

“I’ll love it. I love it now but I just can’t think about it. You know
how I get when I worry.”

“If I do it you won’t ever worry?”

“I won’t worry about that because it’s perfectly simple.”

“Then I’ll do it. Because I don’t care about me.”

“What do you mean?”

“I don’t care about me.”

“Well, I care about you.”

“Oh, yes. But I don’t care about me. And I’ll do it and then everything
will be fine.”

“I don’t want you to do it if you feel that way.”

The girl stood up and walked to the end of the station. Across, on the
other side, were fields of grain and trees along the banks of the Ebro.
Far away, beyond the river, were mountains. The shadow of a cloud moved
across the field of grain and she saw the river through the trees.

“And we could have all this,” she said. “And we could have everything
and every day we make it more impossible.”

“What did you say?”

“I said we could have everything.”

“We can have everything.”

“No, we can’t.”

“We can have the whole world.”

“No, we can’t.”

“We can go everywhere.”

“No, we can’t. It isn’t ours any more.”

“It’s ours.”

“No, it isn’t. And once they take it away, you never get it back.”

“But they haven’t taken it away.”

“We’ll wait and see.”

“Come on back in the shade,” he said. “You mustn’t feel that way.”

“I don’t feel any way,” the girl said. “I just know things.”

“I don’t want you to do anything that you don’t want to do——”

“Nor that isn’t good for me,” she said. “I know. Could we have another
beer?”

“All right. But you’ve got to realize——”

“I realize,” the girl said. “Can’t we maybe stop talking?”

They sat down at the table and the girl looked across at the hills on
the dry side of the valley and the man looked at her and at the table.

“You’ve got to realize,” he said, “that I don’t want you to do it if you
don’t want to. I’m perfectly willing to go through with it if it means
anything to you.”

“Doesn’t it mean anything to you? We could get along.”

“Of course it does. But I don’t want anybody but you. I don’t want any
one else. And I know it’s perfectly simple.”

“Yes, you know it’s perfectly simple.”

“It’s all right for you to say that, but I do know it.”

“Would you do something for me now?”

“I’d do anything for you.”

“Would you please please please please please please please stop
talking?”

He did not say anything but looked at the bags against the wall of the
station. There were labels on them from all the hotels where they had
spent nights.

“But I don’t want you to,” he said, “I don’t care anything about it.”

“I’ll scream,” the girl said.

The woman came out through the curtains with two glasses of beer and put
them down on the damp felt pads. “The train comes in five minutes,” she
said.

“What did she say?” asked the girl.

“That the train is coming in five minutes.”

The girl smiled brightly at the woman, to thank her.

“I’d better take the bags over to the other side of the station,” the
man said. She smiled at him.

“All right. Then come back and we’ll finish the beer.”

He picked up the two heavy bags and carried them around the station to
the other tracks. He looked up the tracks but could not see the train.
Coming back, he walked through the barroom, where people waiting for the
train were drinking. He drank an Anis at the bar and looked at the
people. They were all waiting reasonably for the train. He went out
through the bead curtain. She was sitting at the table and smiled at
him.

“Do you feel better?” he asked.

“I feel fine,” she said. “There’s nothing wrong with me. I feel fine.”




                              THE KILLERS


THE door of Henry’s lunch-room opened and two men came in. They sat down
at the counter.

“What’s yours?” George asked them.

“I don’t know,” one of the men said. “What do you want to eat, Al?”

“I don’t know,” said Al. “I don’t know what I want to eat.”

Outside it was getting dark. The street-light came on outside the
window. The two men at the counter read the menu. From the other end of
the counter Nick Adams watched them. He had been talking to George when
they came in.

“I’ll have a roast pork tenderloin with apple sauce and mashed
potatoes,” the first man said.

“It isn’t ready yet.”

“What the hell do you put it on the card for?”

“That’s the dinner,” George explained. “You can get that at six
o’clock.”

George looked at the clock on the wall behind the counter.

“It’s five o’clock.”

“The clock says twenty minutes past five,” the second man said.

“It’s twenty minutes fast.”

“Oh, to hell with the clock,” the first man said. “What have you got to
eat?”

“I can give you any kind of sandwiches,” George said. “You can have ham
and eggs, bacon and eggs, liver and bacon, or a steak.”

“Give me chicken croquettes with green peas and cream sauce and mashed
potatoes.”

“That’s the dinner.”

“Everything we want’s the dinner, eh? That’s the way you work it.”

“I can give you ham and eggs, bacon and eggs, liver——”

“I’ll take ham and eggs,” the man called Al said. He wore a derby hat
and a black overcoat buttoned across the chest. His face was small and
white and he had tight lips. He wore a silk muffler and gloves.

“Give me bacon and eggs,” said the other man. He was about the same size
as Al. Their faces were different, but they were dressed like twins.
Both wore overcoats too tight for them. They sat leaning forward, their
elbows on the counter.

“Got anything to drink?” Al asked.

“Silver beer, bevo, ginger-ale,” George said.

“I mean you got anything to _drink_?”

“Just those I said.”

“This is a hot town,” said the other. “What do they call it?”

“Summit.”

“Ever hear of it?” Al asked his friend.

“No,” said the friend.

“What do you do here nights?” Al asked.

“They eat the dinner,” his friend said. “They all come here and eat the
big dinner.”

“That’s right,” George said.

“So you think that’s right?” Al asked George.

“Sure.”

“You’re a pretty bright boy, aren’t you?”

“Sure,” said George.

“Well, you’re not,” said the other little man. “Is he, Al?”

“He’s dumb,” said Al. He turned to Nick. “What’s your name?”

“Adams.”

“Another bright boy,” Al said. “Ain’t he a bright boy, Max?”

“The town’s full of bright boys,” Max said.

George put the two platters, one of ham and eggs, the other of bacon and
eggs, on the counter. He set down two side-dishes of fried potatoes and
closed the wicket into the kitchen.

“Which is yours?” he asked Al.

“Don’t you remember?”

“Ham and eggs.”

“Just a bright boy,” Max said. He leaned forward and took the ham and
eggs. Both men ate with their gloves on. George watched them eat.

“What are _you_ looking at?” Max looked at George.

“Nothing.”

“The hell you were. You were looking at me.”

“Maybe the boy meant it for a joke, Max,” Al said.

George laughed.

“_You_ don’t have to laugh,” Max said to him. “_You_ don’t have to laugh
at all, see?”

“All right,” said George.

“So he thinks it’s all right.” Max turned to Al. “He thinks it’s all
right. That’s a good one.”

“Oh, he’s a thinker,” Al said. They went on eating.

“What’s the bright boy’s name down the counter?” Al asked Max.

“Hey, bright boy,” Max said to Nick. “You go around on the other side of
the counter with your boy friend.”

“What’s the idea?” Nick asked.

“There isn’t any idea.”

“You better go around, bright boy,” Al said. Nick went around behind the
counter.

“What’s the idea?” George asked.

“None of your damn business,” Al said. “Who’s out in the kitchen?”

“The nigger.”

“What do you mean the nigger?”

“The nigger that cooks.”

“Tell him to come in.”

“What’s the idea?”

“Tell him to come in.”

“Where do you think you are?”

“We know damn well where we are,” the man called Max said. “Do we look
silly?”

“You talk silly,” Al said to him. “What the hell do you argue with this
kid for? Listen,” he said to George, “tell the nigger to come out here.”

“What are you going to do to him?”

“Nothing. Use your head, bright boy. What would we do to a nigger?”

George opened the slit that opened back into the kitchen. “Sam,” he
called. “Come in here a minute.”

The door to the kitchen opened and the nigger came in. “What was it?” he
asked. The two men at the counter took a look at him.

“All right, nigger. You stand right there,” Al said.

Sam, the nigger, standing in his apron, looked at the two men sitting at
the counter. “Yes, sir,” he said. Al got down from his stool.

“I’m going back to the kitchen with the nigger and bright boy,” he said.
“Go on back to the kitchen, nigger. You go with him, bright boy.” The
little man walked after Nick and Sam, the cook, back into the kitchen.
The door shut after them. The man called Max sat at the counter opposite
George. He didn’t look at George but looked in the mirror that ran along
back of the counter. Henry’s had been made over from a saloon into a
lunch-counter.

“Well, bright boy,” Max said, looking into the mirror, “why don’t you
say something?”

“What’s it all about?”

“Hey, Al,” Max called, “bright boy wants to know what it’s all about.”

“Why don’t you tell him?” Al’s voice came from the kitchen.

“What do you think it’s all about?”

“I don’t know.”

“What do you think?”

Max looked into the mirror all the time he was talking.

“I wouldn’t say.”

“Hey, Al, bright boy says he wouldn’t say what he thinks it’s all
about.”

“I can hear you, all right,” Al said from the kitchen. He had propped
open the slit that dishes passed through into the kitchen with a catsup
bottle. “Listen, bright boy,” he said from the kitchen to George. “Stand
a little further along the bar. You move a little to the left, Max.” He
was like a photographer arranging for a group picture.

“Talk to me, bright boy,” Max said. “What do you think’s going to
happen?”

George did not say anything.

“I’ll tell you,” Max said. “We’re going to kill a Swede. Do you know a
big Swede named Ole Andreson?”

“Yes.”

“He comes here to eat every night, don’t he?”

“Sometimes he comes here.”

“He comes here at six o’clock, don’t he?”

“If he comes.”

“We know all that, bright boy,” Max said. “Talk about something else.
Ever go to the movies?”

“Once in a while.”

“You ought to go to the movies more. The movies are fine for a bright
boy like you.”

“What are you going to kill Ole Andreson for? What did he ever do to
you?”

“He never had a chance to do anything to us. He never even seen us.”

“And he’s only going to see us once,” Al said from the kitchen.

“What are you going to kill him for, then?” George asked.

“We’re killing him for a friend. Just to oblige a friend, bright boy.”

“Shut up,” said Al from the kitchen. “You talk too goddam much.”

“Well, I got to keep bright boy amused. Don’t I, bright boy?”

“You talk too damn much,” Al said. “The nigger and my bright boy are
amused by themselves. I got them tied up like a couple of girl friends
in the convent.”

“I suppose you were in a convent.”

“You never know.”

“You were in a kosher convent. That’s where you were.”

George looked up at the clock.

“If anybody comes in you tell them the cook is off, and if they keep
after it, you tell them you’ll go back and cook yourself. Do you get
that, bright boy?”

“All right,” George said. “What you going to do with us afterward?”

“That’ll depend,” Max said. “That’s one of those things you never know
at the time.”

George looked up at the clock. It was a quarter past six. The door from
the street opened. A street-car motorman came in.

“Hello, George,” he said. “Can I get supper?”

“Sam’s gone out,” George said. “He’ll be back in about half an hour.”

“I’d better go up the street,” the motorman said. George looked at the
clock. It was twenty minutes past six.

“That was nice, bright boy,” Max said. “You’re a regular little
gentleman.”

“He knew I’d blow his head off,” Al said from the kitchen.

“No,” said Max. “It ain’t that. Bright boy is nice. He’s a nice boy. I
like him.”

At six-fifty-five George said: “He’s not coming.”

Two other people had been in the lunch-room. Once George had gone out to
the kitchen and made a ham-and-egg sandwich “to go” that a man wanted to
take with him. Inside the kitchen he saw Al, his derby hat tipped back,
sitting on a stool beside the wicket with the muzzle of a sawed-off
shotgun resting on the ledge. Nick and the cook were back to back in the
corner, a towel tied in each of their mouths. George had cooked the
sandwich, wrapped it up in oiled paper, put it in a bag, brought it in,
and the man had paid for it and gone out.

“Bright boy can do everything,” Max said. “He can cook and everything.
You’d make some girl a nice wife, bright boy.”

“Yes?” George said. “Your friend, Ole Andreson, isn’t going to come.”

“We’ll give him ten minutes,” Max said.

Max watched the mirror and the clock. The hands of the clock marked
seven o’clock, and then five minutes past seven.

“Come on, Al,” said Max. “We better go. He’s not coming.”

“Better give him five minutes,” Al said from the kitchen.

In the five minutes a man came in, and George explained that the cook
was sick.

“Why the hell don’t you get another cook?” the man asked. “Aren’t you
running a lunch-counter?” He went out.

“Come on, Al,” Max said.

“What about the two bright boys and the nigger?”

“They’re all right.”

“You think so?”

“Sure. We’re through with it.”

“I don’t like it,” said Al. “It’s sloppy. You talk too much.”

“Oh, what the hell,” said Max. “We got to keep amused, haven’t we?”

“You talk too much, all the same,” Al said. He came out from the
kitchen. The cut-off barrels of the shotgun made a slight bulge under
the waist of his too tight-fitting overcoat. He straightened his coat
with his gloved hands.

“So long, bright boy,” he said to George. “You got a lot of luck.”

“That’s the truth,” Max said. “You ought to play the races, bright boy.”

The two of them went out the door. George watched them, through the
window, pass under the arc-light and cross the street. In their tight
overcoats and derby hats they looked like a vaudeville team. George went
back through the swinging-door into the kitchen and untied Nick and the
cook.

“I don’t want any more of that,” said Sam, the cook. “I don’t want any
more of that.”

Nick stood up. He had never had a towel in his mouth before.

“Say,” he said. “What the hell?” He was trying to swagger it off.

“They were going to kill Ole Andreson,” George said. “They were going to
shoot him when he came in to eat.”

“Ole Andreson?”

“Sure.”

The cook felt the corners of his mouth with his thumbs.

“They all gone?” he asked.

“Yeah,” said George. “They’re gone now.”

“I don’t like it,” said the cook. “I don’t like any of it at all.”

“Listen,” George said to Nick. “You better go see Ole Andreson.”

“All right.”

“You better not have anything to do with it at all,” Sam, the cook,
said. “You better stay way out of it.”

“Don’t go if you don’t want to,” George said.

“Mixing up in this ain’t going to get you anywhere,” the cook said. “You
stay out of it.”

“I’ll go see him,” Nick said to George. “Where does he live?”

The cook turned away.

“Little boys always know what they want to do,” he said.

“He lives up at Hirsch’s rooming-house,” George said to Nick.

“I’ll go up there.”

Outside the arc-light shone through the bare branches of a tree. Nick
walked up the street beside the car-tracks and turned at the next
arc-light down a side-street. Three houses up the street was Hirsch’s
rooming-house. Nick walked up the two steps and pushed the bell. A woman
came to the door.

“Is Ole Andreson here?”

“Do you want to see him?”

“Yes, if he’s in.”

Nick followed the woman up a flight of stairs and back to the end of a
corridor. She knocked on the door.

“Who is it?”

“It’s somebody to see you, Mr. Andreson,” the woman said.

“It’s Nick Adams.”

“Come in.”

Nick opened the door and went into the room. Ole Andreson was lying on
the bed with all his clothes on. He had been a heavyweight prizefighter
and he was too long for the bed. He lay with his head on two pillows. He
did not look at Nick.

“What was it?” he asked.

“I was up at Henry’s,” Nick said, “and two fellows came in and tied up
me and the cook, and they said they were going to kill you.”

It sounded silly when he said it. Ole Andreson said nothing.

“They put us out in the kitchen,” Nick went on. “They were going to
shoot you when you came in to supper.”

Ole Andreson looked at the wall and did not say anything.

“George thought I better come and tell you about it.”

“There isn’t anything I can do about it,” Ole Andreson said.

“I’ll tell you what they were like.”

“I don’t want to know what they were like,” Ole Andreson said. He looked
at the wall. “Thanks for coming to tell me about it.”

“That’s all right.”

Nick looked at the big man lying on the bed.

“Don’t you want me to go and see the police?”

“No,” Ole Andreson said. “That wouldn’t do any good.”

“Isn’t there something I could do?”

“No. There ain’t anything to do.”

“Maybe it was just a bluff.”

“No. It ain’t just a bluff.”

Ole Andreson rolled over toward the wall.

“The only thing is,” he said, talking toward the wall, “I just can’t
make up my mind to go out. I been in here all day.”

“Couldn’t you get out of town?”

“No,” Ole Andreson said. “I’m through with all that running around.”

He looked at the wall.

“There ain’t anything to do now.”

“Couldn’t you fix it up some way?”

“No. I got in wrong.” He talked in the same flat voice. “There ain’t
anything to do. After a while I’ll make up my mind to go out.”

“I better go back and see George,” Nick said.

“So long,” said Ole Andreson. He did not look toward Nick. “Thanks for
coming around.”

Nick went out. As he shut the door he saw Ole Andreson with all his
clothes on, lying on the bed looking at the wall.

“He’s been in his room all day,” the landlady said downstairs. “I guess
he don’t feel well. I said to him: ‘Mr. Andreson, you ought to go out
and take a walk on a nice fall day like this,’ but he didn’t feel like
it.”

“He doesn’t want to go out.”

“I’m sorry he don’t feel well,” the woman said. “He’s an awfully nice
man. He was in the ring, you know.”

“I know it.”

“You’d never know it except from the way his face is,” the woman said.
They stood talking just inside the street door. “He’s just as gentle.”

“Well, good-night, Mrs. Hirsch,” Nick said.

“I’m not Mrs. Hirsch,” the woman said. “She owns the place. I just look
after it for her. I’m Mrs. Bell.”

“Well, good-night, Mrs. Bell,” Nick said.

“Good-night,” the woman said.

Nick walked up the dark street to the corner under the arc-light, and
then along the car-tracks to Henry’s eating-house. George was inside,
back of the counter.

“Did you see Ole?”

“Yes,” said Nick. “He’s in his room and he won’t go out.”

The cook opened the door from the kitchen when he heard Nick’s voice.

“I don’t even listen to it,” he said and shut the door.

“Did you tell him about it?” George asked.

“Sure. I told him but he knows what it’s all about.”

“What’s he going to do?”

“Nothing.”

“They’ll kill him.”

“I guess they will.”

“He must have got mixed up in something in Chicago.”

“I guess so,” said Nick.

“It’s a hell of a thing.”

“It’s an awful thing,” Nick said.

They did not say anything. George reached down for a towel and wiped the
counter.

“I wonder what he did?” Nick said.

“Double-crossed somebody. That’s what they kill them for.”

“I’m going to get out of this town,” Nick said.

“Yes,” said George. “That’s a good thing to do.”

“I can’t stand to think about him waiting in the room and knowing he’s
going to get it. It’s too damned awful.”

“Well,” said George, “you better not think about it.”




                         CHE TI DICE LA PATRIA?


THE road of the pass was hard and smooth and not yet dusty in the early
morning. Below were the hills with oak and chestnut trees, and far away
below was the sea. On the other side were snowy mountains.

We came down from the pass through wooded country. There were bags of
charcoal piled beside the road, and through the trees we saw
charcoal-burners’ huts. It was Sunday and the road, rising and falling,
but always dropping away from the altitude of the pass, went through the
scrub woods and through villages.

Outside the villages there were fields with vines. The fields were brown
and the vines coarse and thick. The houses were white, and in the
streets the men, in their Sunday clothes, were playing bowls. Against
the walls of some of the houses there were pear trees, their branches
candelabraed against the white walls. The pear trees had been sprayed,
and the walls of the houses were stained a metallic blue-green by the
spray vapor. There were small clearings around the villages where the
vines grew, and then the woods.

In a village, twenty kilometres above Spezia, there was a crowd in the
square, and a young man carrying a suitcase came up to the car and asked
us to take him in to Spezia.

“There are only two places, and they are occupied,” I said. We had an
old Ford coupé.

“I will ride on the outside.”

“You will be uncomfortable.”

“That makes nothing. I must go to Spezia.”

“Should we take him?” I asked Guy.

“He seems to be going anyway,” Guy said. The young man handed in a
parcel through the window.

“Look after this,” he said. Two men tied his suitcase on the back of the
car, above our suitcases. He shook hands with every one, explained that
to a Fascist and a man as used to travelling as himself there was no
discomfort, and climbed up on the running-board on the left-hand side of
the car, holding on inside, his right arm through the open window.

“You can start,” he said. The crowd waved. He waved with his free hand.

“What did he say?” Guy asked me.

“That we could start.”

“Isn’t he nice?” Guy said.

The road followed a river. Across the river were mountains. The sun was
taking the frost out of the grass. It was bright and cold and the air
came cold through the open wind-shield.

“How do you think he likes it out there?” Guy was looking up the road.
His view out of his side of the car was blocked by our guest. The young
man projected from the side of the car like the figurehead of a ship. He
had turned his coat collar up and pulled his hat down and his nose
looked cold in the wind.

“Maybe he’ll get enough of it,” Guy said. “That’s the side our bum
tire’s on.”

“Oh, he’d leave us if we blew out,” I said. “He wouldn’t get his
travelling-clothes dirty.”

“Well, I don’t mind him,” Guy said—“except the way he leans out on the
turns.”

The woods were gone; the road had left the river to climb; the radiator
was boiling; the young man looked annoyedly and suspiciously at the
steam and rusty water; the engine was grinding, with both Guy’s feet on
the first-speed pedal, up and up, back and forth and up, and, finally,
out level. The grinding stopped, and in the new quiet there was a great
churning bubbling in the radiator. We were at the top of the last range
above Spezia and the sea. The road descended with short, barely rounded
turns. Our guest hung out on the turns and nearly pulled the top-heavy
car over.

“You can’t tell him not to,” I said to Guy. “It’s his sense of
self-preservation.”

“The great Italian sense.”

“The greatest Italian sense.”

We came down around curves, through deep dust, the dust powdering the
olive trees. Spezia spread below along the sea. The road flattened
outside the town. Our guest put his head in the window.

“I want to stop.”

“Stop it,” I said to Guy.

We slowed up, at the side of the road. The young man got down, went to
the back of the car and untied the suitcase.

“I stop here, so you won’t get into trouble carrying passengers,” he
said. “My package.”

I handed him the package. He reached in his pocket.

“How much do I owe you?”

“Nothing.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t know,” I said.

“Then thanks,” the young man said, not “thank you,” or “thank you very
much,” or “thank you a thousand times,” all of which you formerly said
in Italy to a man when he handed you a time-table or explained about a
direction. The young man uttered the lowest form of the word “thanks”
and looked after us suspiciously as Guy started the car. I waved my hand
at him. He was too dignified to reply. We went on into Spezia.

“That’s a young man that will go a long way in Italy,” I said to Guy.

“Well,” said Guy, “he went twenty kilometres with us.”

                            A MEAL IN SPEZIA

We came into Spezia looking for a place to eat. The street was wide and
the houses high and yellow. We followed the tram-track into the centre
of town. On the walls of the houses were stencilled eye-bugging
portraits of Mussolini, with hand-painted “vivas,” the double V in black
paint with drippings of paint down the wall. Side-streets went down to
the harbor. It was bright and the people were all out for Sunday. The
stone paving had been sprinkled and there were damp stretches in the
dust. We went close to the curb to avoid a tram.

“Let’s eat somewhere simple,” Guy said.

We stopped opposite two restaurant signs. We were standing across the
street and I was buying the papers. The two restaurants were side by
side. A woman standing in the doorway of one smiled at us and we crossed
the street and went in.

It was dark inside and at the back of the room three girls were sitting
at a table with an old woman. Across from us, at another table, sat a
sailor. He sat there neither eating nor drinking. Further back, a young
man in a blue suit was writing at a table. His hair was pomaded and
shining and he was very smartly dressed and clean-cut looking.

The light came through the doorway, and through the window where
vegetables, fruit, steaks, and chops were arranged in a show-case. A
girl came and took our order and another girl stood in the doorway. We
noticed that she wore nothing under her house dress. The girl who took
our order put her arm around Guy’s neck while we were looking at the
menu. There were three girls in all, and they all took turns going and
standing in the doorway. The old woman at the table in the back of the
room spoke to them and they sat down again with her.

There was no doorway leading from the room except into the kitchen. A
curtain hung over it. The girl who had taken our order came in from the
kitchen with spaghetti. She put it on the table and brought a bottle of
red wine and sat down at the table.

“Well,” I said to Guy, “you wanted to eat some place simple.”

“This isn’t simple. This is complicated.”

“What do you say?” asked the girl. “Are you Germans?”

“South Germans,” I said. “The South Germans are a gentle, lovable
people.”

“Don’t understand,” she said.

“What’s the mechanics of this place?” Guy asked. “Do I have to let her
put her arm around my neck?”

“Certainly,” I said. “Mussolini has abolished the brothels. This is a
restaurant.”

The girl wore a one-piece dress. She leaned forward against the table
and put her hands on her breasts and smiled. She smiled better on one
side than on the other and turned the good side toward us. The charm of
the good side had been enhanced by some event which had smoothed the
other side of her nose in, as warm wax can be smoothed. Her nose,
however, did not look like warm wax. It was very cold and firmed, only
smoothed in. “You like me?” she asked Guy.

“He adores you,” I said. “But he doesn’t speak Italian.”

“Ich spreche Deutsch,” she said, and stroked Guy’s hair.

“Speak to the lady in your native tongue, Guy.”

“Where do you come from?” asked the lady.

“Potsdam.”

“And you will stay here now for a little while?”

“In this so dear Spezia?” I asked.

“Tell her we have to go,” said Guy. “Tell her we are very ill, and have
no money.”

“My friend is a misogynist,” I said, “an old German misogynist.”

“Tell him I love him.”

I told him.

“Will you shut your mouth and get us out of here?” Guy said. The lady
had placed another arm around his neck. “Tell him he is mine,” she said.
I told him.

“Will you get us out of here?”

“You are quarrelling,” the lady said. “You do not love one another.”

“We are Germans,” I said proudly, “old South Germans.”

“Tell him he is a beautiful boy,” the lady said. Guy is thirty-eight and
takes some pride in the fact that he is taken for a travelling salesman
in France. “You are a beautiful boy,” I said.

“Who says so?” Guy asked, “you or her?”

“She does. I’m just your interpreter. Isn’t that what you got me in on
this trip for?”

“I’m glad it’s her,” said Guy. “I didn’t want to have to leave you here
too.”

“I don’t know. Spezia’s a lovely place.”

“Spezia,” the lady said. “You are talking about Spezia.”

“Lovely place,” I said.

“It is my country,” she said. “Spezia is my home and Italy is my
country.”

“She says that Italy is her country.”

“Tell her it looks like her country,” Guy said.

“What have you for dessert?” I asked.

“Fruit,” she said. “We have bananas.”

“Bananas are all right,” Guy said. “They’ve got skins on.”

“Oh, he takes bananas,” the lady said. She embraced Guy.

“What does she say?” he asked, keeping his face out of the way.

“She is pleased because you take bananas.”

“Tell her I don’t take bananas.”

“The Signor does not take bananas.”

“Ah,” said the lady, crestfallen, “he doesn’t take bananas.”

“Tell her I take a cold bath every morning,” Guy said.

“The Signor takes a cold bath every morning.”

“No understand,” the lady said.

Across from us, the property sailor had not moved. No one in the place
paid any attention to him.

“We want the bill,” I said.

“Oh, no. You must stay.”

“Listen,” the clean-cut young man said from the table where he was
writing, “let them go. These two are worth nothing.”

The lady took my hand. “You won’t stay? You won’t ask him to stay?”

“We have to go,” I said. “We have to get to Pisa, or if possible,
Firenze, to-night. We can amuse ourselves in those cities at the end of
the day. It is now the day. In the day we must cover distance.”

“To stay a little while is nice.”

“To travel is necessary during the light of day.”

“Listen,” the clean-cut young man said. “Don’t bother to talk with these
two. I tell you they are worth nothing and I know.”

“Bring us the bill,” I said. She brought the bill from the old woman and
went back and sat at the table. Another girl came in from the kitchen.
She walked the length of the room and stood in the doorway.

“Don’t bother with these two,” the clean-cut young man said in a wearied
voice. “Come and eat. They are worth nothing.”

We paid the bill and stood up. All the girls, the old woman, and the
clean-cut young man sat down at table together. The property sailor sat
with his head in his hands. No one had spoken to him all the time we
were at lunch. The girl brought us our change that the old woman counted
out for her and went back to her place at the table. We left a tip on
the table and went out. When we were seated in the car ready to start,
the girl came out and stood in the door. We started and I waved to her.
She did not wave, but stood there looking after us.

                             AFTER THE RAIN

It was raining hard when we passed through the suburbs of Genoa and,
even going very slowly behind the tram-cars and the motor trucks, liquid
mud splashed on to the sidewalks, so that people stepped into doorways
as they saw us coming. In San Pier d’Arena, the industrial suburb
outside of Genoa, there is a wide street with two car-tracks and we
drove down the centre to avoid sending the mud on to the men going home
from work. On our left was the Mediterranean. There was a big sea
running and waves broke and the wind blew the spray against the car. A
river-bed that, when we had passed, going into Italy, had been wide,
stony and dry, was running brown, and up to the banks. The brown water
discolored the sea and as the waves thinned and cleared in breaking, the
light came through the yellow water and the crests, detached by the
wind, blew across the road.

A big car passed us, going fast, and a sheet of muddy water rose up and
over our wind-shield and radiator. The automatic wind-shield cleaner
moved back and forth, spreading the film over the glass. We stopped and
ate lunch at Sestri. There was no heat in the restaurant and we kept our
hats and coats on. We could see the car outside, through the window. It
was covered with mud and was stopped beside some boats that had been
pulled up beyond the waves. In the restaurant you could see your breath.

The _pasta asciuta_ was good; the wine tasted of alum, and we poured
water in it. Afterward the waiter brought beefsteak and fried potatoes.
A man and a woman sat at the far end of the restaurant. He was
middle-aged and she was young and wore black. All during the meal she
would blow out her breath in the cold damp air. The man would look at it
and shake his head. They ate without talking and the man held her hand
under the table. She was good-looking and they seemed very sad. They had
a travelling-bag with them.

We had the papers and I read the account of the Shanghai fighting aloud
to Guy. After the meal, he left with the waiter in search for a place
which did not exist in the restaurant, and I cleaned off the
wind-shield, the lights and the license plates with a rag. Guy came back
and we backed the car out and started. The waiter had taken him across
the road and into an old house. The people in the house were suspicious
and the waiter had remained with Guy to see nothing was stolen.

“Although I don’t know how, me not being a plumber, they expected me to
steal anything,” Guy said.

As we came up on a headland beyond the town, the wind struck the car and
nearly tipped it over.

“It’s good it blows us away from the sea,” Guy said.

“Well,” I said, “they drowned Shelley somewhere along here.”

“That was down by Viareggio,” Guy said. “Do you remember what we came to
this country for?”

“Yes,” I said, “but we didn’t get it.”

“We’ll be out of it to-night.”

“If we can get past Ventimiglia.”

“We’ll see. I don’t like to drive this coast at night.” It was early
afternoon and the sun was out. Below, the sea was blue with whitecaps
running toward Savona. Back, beyond the cape, the brown and blue waters
joined. Out ahead of us, a tramp steamer was going up the coast.

“Can you still see Genoa?” Guy asked.

“Oh, yes.”

“That next big cape ought to put it out of sight.”

“We’ll see it a long time yet. I can still see Portofino Cape behind
it.”

Finally we could not see Genoa. I looked back as we came out and there
was only the sea, and below in the bay, a line of beach with
fishing-boats and above, on the side of the hill, a town and then capes
far down the coast.

“It’s gone now,” I said to Guy.

“Oh, it’s been gone a long time now.”

“But we couldn’t be sure till we got way out.”

There was a sign with a picture of an S-turn and Svolta Pericolosa. The
road curved around the headland and the wind blew through the crack in
the wind-shield. Below the cape was a flat stretch beside the sea. The
wind had dried the mud and the wheels were beginning to lift dust. On
the flat road we passed a Fascist riding a bicycle, a heavy revolver in
a holster on his back. He held the middle of the road on his bicycle and
we turned out for him. He looked up at us as we passed. Ahead there was
a railway crossing, and as we came toward it the gates went down.

As we waited, the Fascist came up on his bicycle. The train went by and
Guy started the engine.

“Wait,” the bicycle man shouted from behind the car. “Your number’s
dirty.”

I got out with a rag. The number had been cleaned at lunch.

“You can read it,” I said.

“You think so?”

“Read it.”

“I cannot read it. It is dirty.”

I wiped it off with the rag.

“How’s that?”

“Twenty-five lire.”

“What?” I said. “You could have read it. It’s only dirty from the state
of the roads.”

“You don’t like Italian roads?”

“They are dirty.”

“Fifty lire.” He spat in the road. “Your car is dirty and you are dirty
too.”

“Good. And give me a receipt with your name.”

He took out a receipt-book, made in duplicate, and perforated, so one
side could be given to the customer, and the other side filled in and
kept as a stub. There was no carbon to record what the customer’s ticket
said.

“Give me fifty lire.”

He wrote in indelible pencil, tore out the slip and handed it to me. I
read it.

“This is for twenty-five lire.”

“A mistake,” he said, and changed the twenty-five to fifty.

“And now the other side. Make it fifty in the part you keep.”

He smiled a beautiful Italian smile and wrote something on the receipt
stub, holding it so I could not see.

“Go on,” he said, “before your number gets dirty again.”

We drove for two hours after it was dark and slept in Mentone that
night. It seemed very cheerful and clean and sane and lovely. We had
driven from Ventimiglia to Pisa and Florence, across the Romagna to
Rimini, back through Forli, Imola, Bologna, Parma, Piacenza and Genoa,
to Ventimiglia again. The whole trip had only taken ten days. Naturally,
in such a short trip, we had no opportunity to see how things were with
the country or the people.




                              FIFTY GRAND


“HOW are you going yourself, Jack?” I asked him.

“You seen this, Walcott?” he says.

“Just in the gym.”

“Well,” Jack says, “I’m going to need a lot of luck with that boy.”

“He can’t hit you, Jack,” Soldier said.

“I wish to hell he couldn’t.”

“He couldn’t hit you with a handful of bird-shot.”

“Bird-shot’d be all right,” Jack says. “I wouldn’t mind bird-shot any.”

“He looks easy to hit,” I said.

“Sure,” Jack says, “he ain’t going to last long. He ain’t going to last
like you and me, Jerry. But right now he’s got everything.”

“You’ll left-hand him to death.”

“Maybe,” Jack says. “Sure. I got a chance to.”

“Handle him like you handled Kid Lewis.”

“Kid Lewis,” Jack said. “That kike!”

The three of us, Jack Brennan, Soldier Bartlett, and I were in
Handley’s. There were a couple of broads sitting at the next table to
us. They had been drinking.

“What do you mean, kike?” one of the broads says. “What do you mean,
kike, you big Irish bum?”

“Sure,” Jack says. “That’s it.”

“Kikes,” this broad goes on. “They’re always talking about kikes, these
big Irishmen. What do you mean, kikes?”

“Come on. Let’s get out of here.”

“Kikes,” this broad goes on. “Whoever saw you ever buy a drink? Your
wife sews your pockets up every morning. These Irishmen and their kikes!
Ted Lewis could lick you too.”

“Sure,” Jack says. “And you give away a lot of things free too, don’t
you?”

We went out. That was Jack. He could say what he wanted to when he
wanted to say it.

Jack started training out at Danny Hogan’s health-farm over in Jersey.
It was nice out there but Jack didn’t like it much. He didn’t like being
away from his wife and the kids, and he was sore and grouchy most of the
time. He liked me and we got along fine together; and he liked Hogan,
but after a while Soldier Bartlett commenced to get on his nerves. A
kidder gets to be an awful thing around a camp if his stuff goes sort of
sour. Soldier was always kidding Jack, just sort of kidding him all the
time. It wasn’t very funny and it wasn’t very good, and it began to get
to Jack. It was sort of stuff like this. Jack would finish up with the
weights and the bag and pull on the gloves.

“You want to work?” he’d say to Soldier.

“Sure. How you want me to work?” Soldier would ask. “Want me to treat
you rough like Walcott? Want me to knock you down a few times?”

“That’s it,” Jack would say. He didn’t like it any, though.

One morning we were all out on the road. We’d been out quite a way and
now we were coming back. We’d go along fast for three minutes and then
walk a minute, and then go fast for three minutes again. Jack wasn’t
ever what you would call a sprinter. He’d move around fast enough in the
ring if he had to, but he wasn’t any too fast on the road. All the time
we were walking Soldier was kidding him. We came up the hill to the
farmhouse.

“Well,” says Jack, “you better go back to town, Soldier.”

“What do you mean?”

“You better go back to town and stay there.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I’m sick of hearing you talk.”

“Yes?” says Soldier.

“Yes,” says Jack.

“You’ll be a damn sight sicker when Walcott gets through with you.”

“Sure,” says Jack, “maybe I will. But I know I’m sick of you.”

So Soldier went off on the train to town that same morning. I went down
with him to the train. He was good and sore.

“I was just kidding him,” he said. We were waiting on the platform. “He
can’t pull that stuff with me, Jerry.”

“He’s nervous and crabby,” I said. “He’s a good fellow, Soldier.”

“The hell he is. The hell he’s ever been a good fellow.”

“Well,” I said, “so long, Soldier.”

The train had come in. He climbed up with his bag.

“So long, Jerry,” he says. “You be in town before the fight?”

“I don’t think so.”

“See you then.”

He went in and the conductor swung up and the train went out. I rode
back to the farm in the cart. Jack was on the porch writing a letter to
his wife. The mail had come and I got the papers and went over on the
other side of the porch and sat down to read. Hogan came out the door
and walked over to me.

“Did he have a jam with Soldier?”

“Not a jam,” I said. “He just told him to go back to town.”

“I could see it coming,” Hogan said. “He never liked Soldier much.”

“No. He don’t like many people.”

“He’s a pretty cold one,” Hogan said.

“Well, he’s always been fine to me.”

“Me too,” Hogan said. “I got no kick on him. He’s a cold one, though.”

Hogan went in through the screen door and I sat there on the porch and
read the papers. It was just starting to get fall weather and it’s nice
country there in Jersey, up in the hills, and after I read the paper
through I sat there and looked out at the country and the road down
below against the woods with cars going along it, lifting the dust up.
It was fine weather and pretty nice-looking country. Hogan came to the
door and I said, “Say, Hogan, haven’t you got anything to shoot out
here?”

“No,” Hogan said. “Only sparrows.”

“Seen the paper?” I said to Hogan.

“What’s in it?”

“Sande booted three of them in yesterday.”

“I got that on the telephone last night.”

“You follow them pretty close, Hogan?” I asked.

“Oh, I keep in touch with them,” Hogan said.

“How about Jack?” I says. “Does he still play them?”

“Him?” said Hogan. “Can you see him doing it?”

Just then Jack came around the corner with the letter in his hand. He’s
wearing a sweater and an old pair of pants and boxing shoes.

“Got a stamp, Hogan?” he asks.

“Give me the letter,” Hogan said. “I’ll mail it for you.”

“Say, Jack,” I said, “didn’t you used to play the ponies?”

“Sure.”

“I knew you did. I knew I used to see you out at Sheepshead.”

“What did you lay off them for?” Hogan asked.

“Lost money.”

Jack sat down on the porch by me. He leaned back against a post. He shut
his eyes in the sun.

“Want a chair?” Hogan asked.

“No,” said Jack. “This is fine.”

“It’s a nice day,” I said. “It’s pretty nice out in the country.”

“I’d a damn sight rather be in town with the wife.”

“Well, you only got another week.”

“Yes,” Jack says. “That’s so.”

We sat there on the porch. Hogan was inside at the office.

“What do you think about the shape I’m in?” Jack asked me.

“Well, you can’t tell,” I said. “You got a week to get around into
form.”

“Don’t stall me.”

“Well,” I said, “you’re not right.”

“I’m not sleeping,” Jack said.

“You’ll be all right in a couple of days.”

“No,” says Jack, “I got the insomnia.”

“What’s on your mind?”

“I miss the wife.”

“Have her come out.”

“No. I’m too old for that.”

“We’ll take a long walk before you turn in and get you good and tired.”

“Tired!” Jack says. “I’m tired all the time.”

He was that way all week. He wouldn’t sleep at night and he’d get up in
the morning feeling that way, you know, when you can’t shut your hands.

“He’s stale as poorhouse cake,” Hogan said. “He’s nothing.”

“I never seen Walcott,” I said.

“He’ll kill him,” said Hogan. “He’ll tear him in two.”

“Well,” I said, “everybody’s got to get it sometime.”

“Not like this, though,” Hogan said. “They’ll think he never trained. It
gives the farm a black eye.”

“You hear what the reporters said about him?”

“Didn’t I! They said he was awful. They said they oughtn’t to let him
fight.”

“Well,” I said, “they’re always wrong, ain’t they?”

“Yes,” said Hogan. “But this time they’re right.”

“What the hell do they know about whether a man’s right or not?”

“Well,” said Hogan, “they’re not such fools.”

“All they did was pick Willard at Toledo. This Lardner, he’s so wise
now, ask him about when he picked Willard at Toledo.”

“Aw, he wasn’t out,” Hogan said. “He only writes the big fights.”

“I don’t care who they are,” I said. “What the hell do they know? They
can write maybe, but what the hell do they know?”

“You don’t think Jack’s in any shape, do you?” Hogan asked.

“No. He’s through. All he needs is to have Corbett pick him to win for
it to be all over.”

“Well, Corbett’ll pick him,” Hogan says.

“Sure. He’ll pick him.”

That night Jack didn’t sleep any either. The next morning was the last
day before the fight. After breakfast we were out on the porch again.

“What do you think about, Jack, when you can’t sleep?” I said.

“Oh, I worry,” Jack says. “I worry about property I got up in the Bronx,
I worry about property I got in Florida. I worry about the kids. I worry
about the wife. Sometimes I think about fights. I think about that kike
Ted Lewis and I get sore. I got some stocks and I worry about them. What
the hell don’t I think about?”

“Well,” I said, “to-morrow night it’ll all be over.”

“Sure,” said Jack. “That always helps a lot, don’t it? That just fixes
everything all up, I suppose. Sure.”

He was sore all day. We didn’t do any work. Jack just moved around a
little to loosen up. He shadow-boxed a few rounds. He didn’t even look
good doing that. He skipped the rope a little while. He couldn’t sweat.

“He’d be better not to do any work at all,” Hogan said. We were standing
watching him skip rope. “Don’t he ever sweat at all any more?”

“He can’t sweat.”

“Do you suppose he’s got the con? He never had any trouble making
weight, did he?”

“No, he hasn’t got any con. He just hasn’t got anything inside any
more.”

“He ought to sweat,” said Hogan.

Jack came over, skipping the rope. He was skipping up and down in front
of us, forward and back, crossing his arms every third time.

“Well,” he says. “What are you buzzards talking about?”

“I don’t think you ought to work any more,” Hogan says. “You’ll be
stale.”

“Wouldn’t that be awful?” Jack says and skips away down the floor,
slapping the rope hard.

That afternoon John Collins showed up out at the farm. Jack was up in
his room. John, came out in a car from town. He had a couple of friends
with him. The car stopped and they all got out.

“Where’s Jack?” John asked me.

“Up in his room, lying down.”

“Lying down?”

“Yes,” I said.

“How is he?”

I looked at the two fellows that were with John.

“They’re friends of his,” John said.

“He’s pretty bad,” I said.

“What’s the matter with him?”

“He don’t sleep.”

“Hell,” said John. “That Irishman could never sleep.”

“He isn’t right,” I said.

“Hell,” John said. “He’s never right. I’ve had him for ten years and
he’s never been right yet.”

The fellows who were with him laughed.

“I want you to shake hands with Mr. Morgan and Mr. Steinfelt,” John
said. “This is Mr. Doyle. He’s been training Jack.”

“Glad to meet you,” I said.

“Let’s go up and see the boy,” the fellow called Morgan said.

“Let’s have a look at him,” Steinfelt said.

We all went upstairs.

“Where’s Hogan?” John asked.

“He’s out in the barn with a couple of his customers,” I said.

“He got many people out here now?” John asked.

“Just two.”

“Pretty quiet, ain’t it?” Morgan said.

“Yes,” I said. “It’s pretty quiet.”

We were outside Jack’s room. John knocked on the door. There wasn’t any
answer.

“Maybe he’s asleep,” I said.

“What the hell’s he sleeping in the daytime for?”

John turned the handle and we all went in. Jack was lying asleep on the
bed. He was face down and his face was in the pillow. Both his arms were
around the pillow.

“Hey, Jack!” John said to him.

Jack’s head moved a little on the pillow. “Jack!” John says, leaning
over him. Jack just dug a little deeper in the pillow. John touched him
on the shoulder. Jack sat up and looked at us. He hadn’t shaved and he
was wearing an old sweater.

“Christ! Why can’t you let me sleep?” he says to John.

“Don’t be sore,” John says. “I didn’t mean to wake you up.”

“Oh no,” Jack says. “Of course not.”

“You know Morgan and Steinfelt,” John said.

“Glad to see you,” Jack says.

“How do you feel, Jack,” Morgan asks him.

“Fine,” Jack says. “How the hell would I feel?”

“You look fine,” Steinfelt says.

“Yes, don’t I,” says Jack. “Say,” he says to John. “You’re my manager.
You get a big enough cut. Why the hell don’t you come out here when the
reporters was out! You want Jerry and me to talk to them?”

“I had Lew fighting in Philadelphia,” John said.

“What the hell’s that to me?” Jack says. “You’re my manager. You get a
big enough cut, don’t you? You aren’t making me any money in
Philadelphia, are you? Why the hell aren’t you out here when I ought to
have you?”

“Hogan was here.”

“Hogan,” Jack says. “Hogan’s as dumb as I am.”

“Soldier Bathlett was out here wukking with you for a while, wasn’t he?”
Steinfelt said to change the subject.

“Yes, he was out here,” Jack says. “He was out here all right.”

“Say, Jerry,” John said to me. “Would you go and find Hogan and tell him
we want to see him in about half an hour?”

“Sure,” I said.

“Why the hell can’t he stick around?” Jack says. “Stick around, Jerry.”

Morgan and Steinfelt looked at each other.

“Quiet down, Jack,” John said to him.

“I better go find Hogan,” I said.

“All right, if you want to go,” Jack says. “None of these guys are going
to send you away, though.”

“I’ll go find Hogan,” I said.

Hogan was out in the gym in the barn. He had a couple of his health-farm
patients with the gloves on. They neither one wanted to hit the other,
for fear the other would come back and hit him.

“That’ll do,” Hogan said when he saw me come in. “You can stop the
slaughter. You gentlemen take a shower and Bruce will rub you down.”

They climbed out through the ropes and Hogan came over to me.

“John Collins is out with a couple of friends to see Jack,” I said.

“I saw them come up in the car.”

“Who are the two fellows with John?”

“They’re what you call wise boys,” Hogan said. “Don’t you know them
two?”

“No,” I said.

“That’s Happy Steinfelt and Lew Morgan. They got a pool-room.”

“I been away a long time,” I said.

“Sure,” said Hogan. “That Happy Steinfelt’s a big operator.”

“I’ve heard his name,” I said.

“He’s a pretty smooth boy,” Hogan said. “They’re a couple of
sharpshooters.”

“Well,” I said. “They want to see us in half an hour.”

“You mean they don’t want to see us until a half an hour?”

“That’s it.”

“Come on in the office,” Hogan said. “To hell with those sharpshooters.”

After about thirty minutes or so Hogan and I went upstairs. We knocked
on Jack’s door. They were talking inside the room.

“Wait a minute,” somebody said.

“To hell with that stuff,” Hogan said. “When you want to see me I’m down
in the office.”

We heard the door unlock. Steinfelt opened it.

“Come on in, Hogan,” he says. “We’re all going to have a drink.”

“Well,” says Hogan. “That’s something.”

We went in. Jack was sitting on the bed. John and Morgan were sitting on
a couple of chairs. Steinfelt was standing up.

“You’re a pretty mysterious lot of boys,” Hogan said.

“Hello, Danny,” John says.

“Hello, Danny,” Morgan says and shakes hands.

Jack doesn’t say anything. He just sits there on the bed. He ain’t with
the others. He’s all by himself. He was wearing an old blue jersey and
pants and had on boxing shoes. He needed a shave. Steinfelt and Morgan
were dressers. John was quite a dresser too. Jack sat there looking
Irish and tough.

Steinfelt brought out a bottle and Hogan brought in some glasses and
everybody had a drink. Jack and I took one and the rest of them went on
and had two or three each.

“Better save some for your ride back,” Hogan said.

“Don’t you worry. We got plenty,” Morgan said.

Jack hadn’t drunk anything since the one drink. He was standing up and
looking at them. Morgan was sitting on the bed where Jack had sat.

“Have a drink, Jack,” John said and handed him the glass and the bottle.

“No,” Jack said, “I never liked to go to these wakes.”

They all laughed. Jack didn’t laugh.

They were all feeling pretty good when they left. Jack stood on the
porch when they got into the car. They waved to him.

“So long,” Jack said.

We had supper. Jack didn’t say anything all during the meal except,
“Will you pass me this?” or “Will you pass me that?” The two health-farm
patients ate at the same table with us. They were pretty nice fellows.
After we finished eating we went out on the porch. It was dark early.

“Like to take a walk, Jerry?” Jack asked.

“Sure,” I said.

We put on our coats and started out. It was quite a way down to the main
road and then we walked along the main road about a mile and a half.
Cars kept going by and we would pull out to the side until they were
past. Jack didn’t say anything. After we had stepped out into the bushes
to let a big car go by Jack said, “To hell with this walking. Come on
back to Hogan’s.”

We went along a side road that cut up over the hill and cut across the
fields back to Hogan’s. We could see the lights of the house up on the
hill. We came around to the front of the house and there standing in the
doorway was Hogan.

“Have a good walk?” Hogan asked.

“Oh, fine,” Jack said. “Listen, Hogan. Have you got any liquor?”

“Sure,” says Hogan. “What’s the idea?”

“Send it up to the room,” Jack says. “I’m going to sleep to-night.”

“You’re the doctor,” Hogan says.

“Come on up to the room, Jerry,” Jack says.

Upstairs Jack sat on the bed with his head in his hands.

“Ain’t it a life?” Jack says.

Hogan brought in a quart of liquor and two glasses.

“Want some ginger-ale?”

“What do you think I want to do, get sick?”

“I just asked you,” said Hogan.

“Have a drink?” said Jack.

“No, thanks,” said Hogan. He went out.

“How about you, Jerry?”

“I’ll have one with you,” I said.

Jack poured out a couple of drinks. “Now,” he said, “I want to take it
slow and easy.”

“Put some water in it,” I said.

“Yes,” Jack said. “I guess that’s better.”

We had a couple of drinks without saying anything. Jack started to pour
me another.

“No,” I said, “that’s all I want.”

“All right,” Jack said. He poured himself out another big shot and put
water in it. He was lighting up a little.

“That was a fine bunch out here this afternoon,” he said. “They don’t
take any chances, those two.”

Then a little later, “Well,” he says, “they’re right. What the hell’s
the good in taking chances?”

“Don’t you want another, Jerry?” he said. “Come on, drink along with
me.”

“I don’t need it, Jack,” I said. “I feel all right.”

“Just have one more,” Jack said. It was softening him up.

“All right,” I said.

Jack poured one for me and another big one for himself.

“You know,” he said, “I like liquor pretty well. If I hadn’t been boxing
I would have drunk quite a lot.”

“Sure,” I said.

“You know,” he said, “I missed a lot, boxing.”

“You made plenty of money.”

“Sure, that’s what I’m after. You know I miss a lot, Jerry.”

“How do you mean?”

“Well,” he says, “like about the wife. And being away from home so much.
It don’t do my girls any good. ‘Whose your old man?’ some of those
society kids’ll say to them. ‘My old man’s Jack Brennan.’ That don’t do
them any good.”

“Hell,” I said, “all that makes a difference is if they got dough.”

“Well,” says Jack, “I got the dough for them all right.”

He poured out another drink. The bottle was about empty.

“Put some water in it,” I said. Jack poured in some water.

“You know,” he says, “you ain’t got any idea how I miss the wife.”

“Sure.”

“You ain’t got any idea. You can’t have an idea what it’s like.”

“It ought to be better out in the country than in town.”

“With me now,” Jack said, “it don’t make any difference where I am. You
can’t have an idea what it’s like.”

“Have another drink.”

“Am I getting soused? Do I talk funny?”

“You’re coming on all right.”

“You can’t have an idea what it’s like. They ain’t anybody can have an
idea what it’s like.”

“Except the wife,” I said.

“She knows,” Jack said. “She knows all right. She knows. You bet she
knows.”

“Put some water in that,” I said.

“Jerry,” says Jack, “you can’t have an idea what it gets to be like.”

He was good and drunk. He was looking at me steady. His eyes were sort
of too steady.

“You’ll sleep all right,” I said.

“Listen, Jerry,” Jack says. “You want to make some money? Get some money
down on Walcott.”

“Yes?”

“Listen, Jerry,” Jack put down the glass. “I’m not drunk now, see? You
know what I’m betting on him? Fifty grand.”

“That’s a lot of dough.”

“Fifty grand,” Jack says, “at two to one. I’ll get twenty-five thousand
bucks. Get some money on him, Jerry.”

“It sounds good,” I said.

“How can I beat him?” Jack says. “It ain’t crooked. How can I beat him?
Why not make money on it?”

“Put some water in that,” I said.

“I’m through after this fight,” Jack says. “I’m through with it. I got
to take a beating. Why shouldn’t I make money on it?”

“Sure.”

“I ain’t slept for a week,” Jack says. “All night I lay awake and worry
my can off. I can’t sleep, Jerry. You ain’t got an idea what it’s like
when you can’t sleep.”

“Sure.”

“I can’t sleep. That’s all. I just can’t sleep. What’s the use of taking
care of yourself all these years when you can’t sleep?”

“It’s bad.”

“You ain’t got an idea what it’s like, Jerry, when you can’t sleep.”

“Put some water in that,” I said.

Well, about eleven o’clock Jack passes out and I put him to bed. Finally
he’s so he can’t keep from sleeping. I helped him get his clothes off
and got him into bed.

“You’ll sleep all right, Jack,” I said.

“Sure,” Jack says, “I’ll sleep now.”

“Good-night, Jack,” I said.

“Good-night, Jerry,” Jack says. “You’re the only friend I got.”

“Oh, hell,” I said.

“You’re the only friend I got,” Jack says, “the only friend I got.”

“Go to sleep,” I said.

“I’ll sleep,” Jack says.

Downstairs Hogan was sitting at the desk in the office reading the
papers. He looked up. “Well, you get your boy friend to sleep?” he asks.

“He’s off.”

“It’s better for him than not sleeping,” Hogan said.

“Sure.”

“You’d have a hell of a time explaining that to these sport writers
though,” Hogan said.

“Well, I’m going to bed myself,” I said.

“Good-night,” said Hogan.

In the morning I came downstairs about eight o’clock and got some
breakfast. Hogan had his two customers out in the barn doing exercises.
I went out and watched them.

“One! Two! Three! Four!” Hogan was counting for them. “Hello, Jerry,” he
said. “Is Jack up yet?”

“No. He’s still sleeping.”

I went back to my room and packed up to go in to town. About nine-thirty
I heard Jack getting up in the next room. When I heard him go downstairs
I went down after him. Jack was sitting at the breakfast table. Hogan
had come in and was standing beside the table.

“How do you feel, Jack?” I asked him.

“Not so bad.”

“Sleep well?” Hogan asked.

“I slept all right,” Jack said. “I got a thick tongue but I ain’t got a
head.”

“Good,” said Hogan. “That was good liquor.”

“Put it on the bill,” Jack says.

“What time you want to go into town?” Hogan asked.

“Before lunch,” Jack says. “The eleven o’clock train.”

“Sit down, Jerry,” Jack said. Hogan went out.

I sat down at the table. Jack was eating a grape-fruit. When he’d find a
seed he’d spit it out in the spoon and dump it on the plate.

“I guess I was pretty stewed last night,” he started.

“You drank some liquor.”

“I guess I said a lot of fool things.”

“You weren’t bad.”

“Where’s Hogan?” he asked. He was through with the grape-fruit.

“He’s out in front in the office.”

“What did I say about betting on the fight?” Jack asked. He was holding
the spoon and sort of poking at the grape-fruit with it.

The girl came in with some ham and eggs and took away the grape-fruit.

“Bring me another glass of milk,” Jack said to her. She went out.

“You said you had fifty grand on Walcott,” I said.

“That’s right,” Jack said.

“That’s a lot of money.”

“I don’t feel too good about it,” Jack said.

“Something might happen.”

“No,” Jack said. “He wants the title bad. They’ll be shooting with him
all right.”

“You can’t ever tell.”

“No. He wants the title. It’s worth a lot of money to him.”

“Fifty grand is a lot of money,” I said.

“It’s business,” said Jack. “I can’t win. You know I can’t win anyway.”

“As long as you’re in there you got a chance.”

“No,” Jack says. “I’m all through. It’s just business.”

“How do you feel?”

“Pretty good,” Jack said. “The sleep was what I needed.”

“You might go good.”

“I’ll give them a good show,” Jack said.

After breakfast Jack called up his wife on the long-distance. He was
inside the booth telephoning.

“That’s the first time he’s called her up since he’s out here,” Hogan
said.

“He writes her every day.”

“Sure,” Hogan says, “a letter only costs two cents.”

Hogan said good-by to us and Bruce, the nigger rubber, drove us down to
the train in the cart.

“Good-by, Mr. Brennan,” Bruce said at the train, “I sure hope you knock
his can off.”

“So long,” Jack said. He gave Bruce two dollars. Bruce had worked on him
a lot. He looked kind of disappointed. Jack saw me looking at Bruce
holding the two dollars.

“It’s all in the bill,” he said. “Hogan charged me for the rubbing.”

On the train going into town Jack didn’t talk. He sat in the corner of
the seat with his ticket in his hat-band and looked out of the window.
Once he turned and spoke to me.

“I told the wife I’d take a room at the Shelby to-night,” he said. “It’s
just around the corner from the Garden. I can go up to the house
to-morrow morning.”

“That’s a good idea,” I said. “Your wife ever see you fight, Jack?”

“No,” Jack says. “She never seen me fight.”

I thought he must be figuring on taking an awful beating if he doesn’t
want to go home afterward. In town we took a taxi up to the Shelby. A
boy came out and took our bags and we went in to the desk.

“How much are the rooms?” Jack asked.

“We only have double rooms,” the clerk says. “I can give you a nice
double room for ten dollars.”

“That’s too steep.”

“I can give you a double room for seven dollars.”

“With a bath?”

“Certainly.”

“You might as well bunk with me, Jerry,” Jack says.

“Oh,” I said, “I’ll sleep down at my brother-in-law’s.”

“I don’t mean for you to pay it,” Jack says. “I just want to get my
money’s worth.”

“Will you register, please?” the clerk says. He looked at the names.
“Number 238, Mister Brennan.”

We went up in the elevator. It was a nice big room with two beds and a
door opening into a bath-room.

“This is pretty good,” Jack says.

The boy who brought us up pulled up the curtains and brought in our
bags. Jack didn’t make any move, so I gave the boy a quarter. We washed
up and Jack said we better go out and get something to eat.

We ate a lunch at Jimmey Handley’s place. Quite a lot of the boys were
there. When we were about half through eating, John came in and sat down
with us. Jack didn’t talk much.

“How are you on the weight, Jack?” John asked him. Jack was putting away
a pretty good lunch.

“I could make it with my clothes on,” Jack said. He never had to worry
about taking off weight. He was a natural welter-weight and he’d never
gotten fat. He’d lost weight out at Hogan’s.

“Well, that’s one thing you never had to worry about,” John said.

“That’s one thing,” Jack says.

We went around to the garden to weigh in after lunch. The match was made
at a hundred forty-seven pounds at three o’clock. Jack stepped on the
scales with a towel around him. The bar didn’t move. Walcott had just
weighed and was standing with a lot of people around him.

“Let’s see what you weigh, Jack,” Freedman, Walcott’s manager said.

“All right, weigh _him_ then,” Jack jerked his head toward Walcott.

“Drop the towel,” Freedman said.

“What do you make it?” Jack asked the fellows who were weighing.

“One hundred and forty-three pounds,” the fat man who was weighing said.

“You’re down fine, Jack,” Freedman says.

“Weigh _him_,” Jack says.

Walcott came over. He was a blond with wide shoulders and arms like a
heavyweight. He didn’t have much legs. Jack stood about half a head
taller than he did.

“Hello, Jack,” he said. His face was plenty marked up.

“Hello,” said Jack. “How you feel?”

“Good,” Walcott says. He dropped the towel from around his waist and
stood on the scales. He had the widest shoulders and back you ever saw.

“One hundred and forty-six pounds and twelve ounces.”

Walcott stepped off and grinned at Jack.

“Well,” John says to him, “Jack’s spotting you about four pounds.”

“More than that when I come in, kid,” Walcott says. “I’m going to go and
eat now.”

We went back and Jack got dressed. “He’s a pretty tough-looking boy,”
Jack says to me.

“He looks as though he’d been hit plenty of times.”

“Oh, yes,” Jack says. “He ain’t hard to hit.”

“Where are you going?” John asked when Jack was dressed.

“Back to the hotel,” Jack says. “You looked after everything?”

“Yes,” John says. “It’s all looked after.”

“I’m going to lie down a while,” Jack says.

“I’ll come around for you about a quarter to seven and we’ll go and
eat.”

“All right.”

Up at the hotel Jack took off his shoes and his coat and lay down for a
while. I wrote a letter. I looked over a couple of times and Jack wasn’t
sleeping. He was lying perfectly still but every once in a while his
eyes would open. Finally he sits up.

“Want to play some cribbage, Jerry?” he says.

“Sure,” I said.

He went over to his suitcase and got out the cards and the cribbage
board. We played cribbage and he won three dollars off me. John knocked
at the door and came in.

“Want to play some cribbage, John?” Jack asked him.

John put his kelly down on the table. It was all wet. His coat was wet
too.

“Is it raining?” Jack asks.

“It’s pouring,” John says. “The taxi I had, got tied up in the traffic
and I got out and walked.”

“Come on, play some cribbage,” Jack says.

“You ought to go and eat.”

“No,” says Jack. “I don’t want to eat yet.”

So they played cribbage for about half an hour and Jack won a dollar and
a half off him.

“Well, I suppose we got to go eat,” Jack says. He went to the window and
looked out.

“Is it still raining?”

“Yes.”

“Let’s eat in the hotel,” John says.

“All right,” Jack says, “I’ll play you once more to see who pays for the
meal.”

After a little while Jack gets up and says, “You buy the meal, John,”
and we went downstairs and ate in the big dining-room.

After we ate we went upstairs and Jack played cribbage with John again
and won two dollars and a half off him. Jack was feeling pretty good.
John had a bag with him with all his stuff in it. Jack took off his
shirt and collar and put on a jersey and a sweater, so he wouldn’t catch
cold when he came out, and put his ring clothes and his bathrobe in a
bag.

“You all ready?” John asks him. “I’ll call up and have them get a taxi.”

Pretty soon the telephone rang and they said the taxi was waiting.

We rode down in the elevator and went out through the lobby, and got in
a taxi and rode around to the Garden. It was raining hard but there was
a lot of people outside on the streets. The Garden was sold out. As we
came in on our way to the dressing-room I saw how full it was. It looked
like half a mile down to the ring. It was all dark. Just the lights over
the ring.

“It’s a good thing, with this rain, they didn’t try and pull this fight
in the ball park,” John said.

“They got a good crowd,” Jack says.

“This is a fight that would draw a lot more than the Garden could hold.”

“You can’t tell about the weather,” Jack says.

John came to the door of the dressing-room and poked his head in. Jack
was sitting there with his bathrobe on, he had his arms folded and was
looking at the floor. John had a couple of handlers with him. They
looked over his shoulder. Jack looked up.

“Is he in?” he asked.

“He’s just gone down,” John said.

We started down. Walcott was just getting into the ring. The crowd gave
him a big hand. He climbed through between the ropes and put his two
fists together and smiled, and shook them at the crowd, first at one
side of the ring, then at the other, and then sat down. Jack got a good
hand coming down through the crowd. Jack is Irish and the Irish always
get a pretty good hand. An Irishman don’t draw in New York like a Jew or
an Italian but they always get a good hand. Jack climbed up and bent
down to go through the ropes and Walcott came over from his corner and
pushed the rope down for Jack to go through. The crowd thought that was
wonderful. Walcott put his hand on Jack’s shoulder and they stood there
just for a second.

“So you’re going to be one of these popular champions,” Jack says to
him. “Take your goddam hand off my shoulder.”

“Be yourself,” Walcott says.

This is all great for the crowd. How gentlemanly the boys are before the
fight! How they wish each other luck!

Solly Freedman came over to our corner while Jack is bandaging his hands
and John is over in Walcott’s corner. Jack puts his thumb through the
slit in the bandage and then wrapped his hand nice and smooth. I taped
it around the wrist and twice across the knuckles.

“Hey,” Freedman says. “Where do you get all that tape?”

“Feel of it,” Jack says. “It’s soft, ain’t it? Don’t be a hick.”

Freedman stands there all the time while Jack bandages the other hand,
and one of the boys that’s going to handle him brings the gloves and I
pull them on and work them around.

“Say, Freedman,” Jack asks, “what nationality is this Walcott?”

“I don’t know,” Solly says. “He’s some sort of a Dane.”

“He’s a Bohemian,” the lad who brought the gloves said.

The referee called them out to the centre of the ring and Jack walks
out. Walcott comes out smiling. They met and the referee put his arm on
each of their shoulders.

“Hello, popularity,” Jack says to Walcott.

“Be yourself.”

“What do you call yourself ‘Walcott’ for?” Jack says. “Didn’t you know
he was a nigger?”

“Listen—” says the referee, and he gives them the same old line. Once
Walcott interrupts him. He grabs Jack’s arm and says, “Can I hit when
he’s got me like this?”

“Keep your hands off me,” Jack says. “There ain’t no moving-pictures of
this.”

They went back to their corners. I lifted the bathrobe off Jack and he
leaned on the ropes and flexed his knees a couple of times and scuffed
his shoes in the rosin. The gong rang and Jack turned quick and went
out. Walcott came toward him and they touched gloves and as soon as
Walcott dropped his hands Jack jumped his left into his face twice.
There wasn’t anybody ever boxed better than Jack. Walcott was after him,
going forward all the time with his chin on his chest. He’s a hooker and
he carries his hands pretty low. All he knows is to get in there and
sock. But every time he gets in there close, Jack has the left hand in
his face. It’s just as though it’s automatic. Jack just raises the left
hand up and it’s in Walcott’s face. Three or four times Jack brings the
right over but Walcott gets it on the shoulder or high up on the head.
He’s just like all these hookers. The only thing he’s afraid of is
another one of the same kind. He’s covered everywhere you can hurt him.
He don’t care about a left-hand in his face.

After about four rounds Jack has him bleeding bad and his face all cut
up, but every time Walcott’s got in close he’s socked so hard he’s got
two big red patches on both sides just below Jack’s ribs. Every time he
gets in close, Jack ties him up, then gets one hand loose and uppercuts
him, but when Walcott gets his hands loose he socks Jack in the body so
they can hear it outside in the street. He’s a socker.

It goes along like that for three rounds more. They don’t talk any.
They’re working all the time. We worked over Jack plenty too, in between
the rounds. He don’t look good at all but he never does much work in the
ring. He don’t move around much and that left-hand is just automatic.
It’s just like it was connected with Walcott’s face and Jack just had to
wish it in every time. Jack is always calm in close and he doesn’t waste
any juice. He knows everything about working in close too and he’s
getting away with a lot of stuff. While they were in our corner I
watched him tie Walcott up, get his right hand loose, turn it and come
up with an uppercut that got Walcott’s nose with the heel of the glove.
Walcott was bleeding bad and leaned his nose on Jack’s shoulder so as to
give Jack some of it too, and Jack sort of lifted his shoulder sharp and
caught him against the nose, and then brought down the right hand and
did the same thing again.

Walcott was sore as hell. By the time they’d gone five rounds he hated
Jack’s guts. Jack wasn’t sore; that is, he wasn’t any sorer than he
always was. He certainly did used to make the fellows he fought hate
boxing. That was why he hated Kid Lewis so. He never got the Kid’s goat.
Kid Lewis always had about three new dirty things Jack couldn’t do. Jack
was as safe as a church all the time he was in there, as long as he was
strong. He certainly was treating Walcott rough. The funny thing was it
looked as though Jack was an open classic boxer. That was because he had
all that stuff too.

After the seventh round Jack says, “My left’s getting heavy.”

From then he started to take a beating. It didn’t show at first. But
instead of him running the fight it was Walcott was running it, instead
of being safe all the time now he was in trouble. He couldn’t keep him
out with the left hand now. It looked as though it was the same as ever,
only now instead of Walcott’s punches just missing him they were just
hitting him. He took an awful beating in the body.

“What’s the round?” Jack asked.

“The eleventh.”

“I can’t stay,” Jack says. “My legs are going bad.”

Walcott had been just hitting him for a long time. It was like a
baseball catcher pulls the ball and takes some of the shock off. From
now on Walcott commenced to land solid. He certainly was a
socking-machine. Jack was just trying to block everything now. It didn’t
show what an awful beating he was taking. In between the rounds I worked
on his legs. The muscles would flutter under my hands all the time I was
rubbing them. He was sick as hell.

“How’s it go?” he asked John, turning around, his face all swollen.

“It’s his fight.”

“I think I can last,” Jack says. “I don’t want this bohunk to stop me.”

It was going just the way he thought it would. He knew he couldn’t beat
Walcott. He wasn’t strong any more. He was all right though. His money
was all right and now he wanted to finish it off right to please
himself. He didn’t want to be knocked out.

The gong rang and we pushed him out. He went out slow. Walcott came
right out after him. Jack put the left in his face and Walcott took it,
came in under it and started working on Jack’s body. Jack tried to tie
him up and it was just like trying to hold on to a buzz-saw. Jack broke
away from it and missed with the right. Walcott clipped him with a
left-hook and Jack went down. He went down on his hands and knees and
looked at us. The referee started counting. Jack was watching us and
shaking his head. At eight John motioned to him. You couldn’t hear on
account of the crowd. Jack got up. The referee had been holding Walcott
back with one arm while he counted.

When Jack was on his feet Walcott started toward him.

“Watch yourself, Jimmy,” I heard Solly Freedman yell to him.

Walcott came up to Jack looking at him. Jack stuck the left hand at him.
Walcott just shook his head. He backed Jack up against the ropes,
measured him and then hooked the left very light to the side of Jack’s
head and socked the right into the body as hard as he could sock, just
as low as he could get it. He must have hit him five inches below the
belt. I thought the eyes would come out of Jack’s head. They stuck way
out. His mouth come open.

The referee grabbed Walcott. Jack stepped forward. If he went down there
went fifty thousand bucks. He walked as though all his insides were
going to fall out.

“It wasn’t low,” he said. “It was a accident.”

The crowd were yelling so you couldn’t hear anything.

“I’m all right,” Jack says. They were right in front of us. The referee
looks at John and then he shakes his head.

“Come on, you polak son-of-a-bitch,” Jack says to Walcott.

John was hanging onto the ropes. He had the towel ready to chuck in.
Jack was standing just a little way out from the ropes. He took a step
forward. I saw the sweat come out on his face like somebody had squeezed
it and a big drop went down his nose.

“Come on and fight,” Jack says to Walcott.

The referee looked at John and waved Walcott on.

“Go in there, you slob,” he says.

Walcott went in. He didn’t know what to do either. He never thought Jack
could have stood it. Jack put the left in his face. There was such a
hell of a lot of yelling going on. They were right in front of us.
Walcott hit him twice. Jack’s face was the worst thing I ever saw,—the
look on it! He was holding himself and all his body together and it all
showed on his face. All the time he was thinking and holding his body in
where it was busted.

Then he started to sock. His face looked awful all the time. He started
to sock with his hands low down by his side, swinging at Walcott.
Walcott covered up and Jack was swinging wild at Walcott’s head. Then he
swung the left and it hit Walcott in the groin and the right hit Walcott
right bang where he’d hit Jack. Way low below the belt. Walcott went
down and grabbed himself there and rolled and twisted around.

The referee grabbed Jack and pushed him toward his corner. John jumps
into the ring. There was all this yelling going on. The referee was
talking with the judges and then the announcer got into the ring with
the megaphone and says, “Walcott on a foul.”

The referee is talking to John and he says, “What could I do? Jack
wouldn’t take the foul. Then when he’s groggy he fouls him.”

“He’d lost it anyway,” John says.

Jack’s sitting on the chair. I’ve got his gloves off and he’s holding
himself in down there with both hands. When he’s got something
supporting it his face doesn’t look so bad.

“Go over and say you’re sorry,” John says into his ear. “It’ll look
good.”

Jack stands up and the sweat comes out all over his face. I put the
bathrobe around him and he holds himself in with one hand under the
bathrobe and goes across the ring. They’ve picked Walcott up and they’re
working on him. There’re a lot of people in Walcott’s corner. Nobody
speaks to Jack. He leans over Walcott.

“I’m sorry,” Jack says. “I didn’t mean to foul you.”

Walcott doesn’t say anything. He looks too damned sick.

“Well, you’re the champion now,” Jack says to him. “I hope you get a
hell of a lot of fun out of it.”

“Leave the kid alone,” Solly Freedman says.

“Hello, Solly,” Jack says. “I’m sorry I fouled your boy.”

Freedman just looks at him.

Jack went to his corner walking that funny jerky way and we got him down
through the ropes and through the reporters’ tables and out down the
aisle. A lot of people want to slap Jack on the back. He goes out
through all that mob in his bathrobe to the dressing-room. It’s a
popular win for Walcott. That’s the way the money was bet in the Garden.

Once we got inside the dressing-room Jack lay down and shut his eyes.

“We want to get to the hotel and get a doctor,” John says.

“I’m all busted inside,” Jack says.

“I’m sorry as hell, Jack,” John says.

“It’s all right,” Jack says.

He lies there with his eyes shut.

“They certainly tried a nice double-cross,” John said.

“Your friends Morgan and Steinfelt,” Jack said. “You got nice friends.”

He lies there, his eyes are open now. His face has still got that awful
drawn look.

“It’s funny how fast you can think when it means that much money,” Jack
says.

“You’re some boy, Jack,” John says.

“No,” Jack says. “It was nothing.”




                            A SIMPLE ENQUIRY


OUTSIDE, the snow was higher than the window. The sunlight came in
through the window and shone on a map on the pine-board wall of the hut.
The sun was high and the light came in over the top of the snow. A
trench had been cut along the open side of the hut, and each clear day
the sun, shining on the wall, reflected heat against the snow and
widened the trench. It was late March. The major sat at a table against
the wall. His adjutant sat at another table.

Around the major’s eyes were two white circles where his snow-glasses
had protected his face from the sun on the snow. The rest of his face
had been burned and then tanned and then burned through the tan. His
nose was swollen and there were edges of loose skin where blisters had
been. While he worked at the papers he put the fingers of his left hand
into a saucer of oil and then spread the oil over his face, touching it
very gently with the tips of his fingers. He was very careful to drain
his fingers on the edge of the saucer so there was only a film of oil on
them, and after he had stroked his forehead and his cheeks, he stroked
his nose very delicately between his fingers. When he had finished he
stood up, took the saucer of oil and went into the small room of the hut
where he slept. “I’m going to take a little sleep,” he said to the
adjutant. In that army an adjutant is not a commissioned officer. “You
will finish up.”

“Yes, signor maggiore,” the adjutant answered. He leaned back in his
chair and yawned. He took a paper-covered book out of the pocket of his
coat and opened it; then laid it down on the table and lit his pipe. He
leaned forward on the table to read and puffed at his pipe. Then he
closed the book and put it back in his pocket. He had too much
paper-work to get through. He could not enjoy reading until it was done.
Outside, the sun went behind a mountain and there was no more light on
the wall of the hut. A soldier came in and put some pine branches,
chopped into irregular lengths, into the stove. “Be soft, Pinin,” the
adjutant said to him. “The major is sleeping.”

Pinin was the major’s orderly. He was a dark-faced boy, and he fixed the
stove, putting the pine wood in carefully, shut the door, and went into
the back of the hut again. The adjutant went on with his papers.

“Tonani,” the major called.

“Signor maggiore?”

“Send Pinin in to me.”

“Pinin!” the adjutant called. Pinin came into the room. “The major wants
you,” the adjutant said.

Pinin walked across the main room of the hut toward the major’s door. He
knocked on the half-opened door. “Signor maggiore?”

“Come in,” the adjutant heard the major say, “and shut the door.”

Inside the room the major lay on his bunk. Pinin stood beside the bunk.
The major lay with his head on the rucksack that he had stuffed with
spare clothing to make a pillow. His long, burned, oiled face looked at
Pinin. His hands lay on the blankets.

“You are nineteen?” he asked.

“Yes, signor maggiore.”

“You have ever been in love?”

“How do you mean, signor maggiore?”

“In love—with a girl?”

“I have been with girls.”

“I did not ask that. I asked if you had been in love—with a girl.”

“Yes, signor maggiore.”

“You are in love with this girl now? You don’t write her. I read all
your letters.”

“I am in love with her,” Pinin said, “but I do not write her.”

“You are sure of this?”

“I am sure.”

“Tonani,” the major said in the same tone of voice, “can you hear me
talking?”

There was no answer from the next room.

“He can not hear,” the major said. “And you are quite sure that you love
a girl?”

“I am sure.”

“And,” the major looked at him quickly, “that you are not corrupt?”

“I don’t know what you mean, corrupt.”

“All right,” the major said. “You needn’t be superior.”

Pinin looked at the floor. The major looked at his brown face, down and
up him, and at his hands. Then he went on, not smiling, “And you don’t
really want—” the major paused. Pinin looked at the floor. “That your
great desire isn’t really—” Pinin looked at the floor. The major leaned
his head back on the rucksack and smiled. He was really relieved: life
in the army was too complicated. “You’re a good boy,” he said. “You’re a
good boy, Pinin. But don’t be superior and be careful some one else
doesn’t come along and take you.”

Pinin stood still beside the bunk.

“Don’t be afraid,” the major said. His hands were folded on the
blankets. “I won’t touch you. You can go back to your platoon if you
like. But you had better stay on as my servant. You’ve less chance of
being killed.”

“Do you want anything of me, signor maggiore?”

“No,” the major said. “Go on and get on with whatever you were doing.
Leave the door open when you go out.”

Pinin went out, leaving the door open. The adjutant looked up at him as
he walked awkwardly across the room and out the door. Pinin was flushed
and moved differently than he had moved when he brought in the wood for
the fire. The adjutant looked after him and smiled. Pinin came in with
more wood for the stove. The major, lying on his bunk, looking at his
cloth-covered helmet and his snow-glasses that hung from a nail on the
wall, heard him walk across the floor. The little devil, he thought, I
wonder if he lied to me.




                              TEN INDIANS


AFTER one Fourth of July, Nick, driving home late from town in the big
wagon with Joe Garner and his family, passed nine drunken Indians along
the road. He remembered there were nine because Joe Garner, driving
along in the dusk, pulled up the horses, jumped down into the road and
dragged an Indian out of the wheel rut. The Indian had been asleep, face
down in the sand. Joe dragged him into the bushes and got back up on the
wagon-box.

“That makes nine of them,” Joe said, “just between here and the edge of
town.”

“Them Indians,” said Mrs. Garner.

Nick was on the back seat with the two Garner boys. He was looking out
from the back seat to see the Indian where Joe had dragged him alongside
of the road.

“Was it Billy Tabeshaw?” Carl asked.

“No.”

“His pants looked mighty like Billy.”

“All Indians wear the same kind of pants.”

“I didn’t see him at all,” Frank said. “Pa was down into the road and
back up again before I seen a thing. I thought he was killing a snake.”

“Plenty of Indians’ll kill snakes to-night, I guess,” Joe Garner said.

“Them Indians,” said Mrs. Garner.

They drove along. The road turned off from the main highway and went up
into the hills. It was hard pulling for the horses and the boys got down
and walked. The road was sandy. Nick looked back from the top of the
hill by the schoolhouse. He saw the lights of Petoskey and, off across
Little Traverse Bay, the lights of Harbour Springs. They climbed back in
the wagon again.

“They ought to put some gravel on that stretch,” Joe Garner said. The
wagon went along the road through the woods. Joe and Mrs. Garner sat
close together on the front seat. Nick sat between the two boys. The
road came out into a clearing.

“Right here was where Pa ran over the skunk.”

“It was further on.”

“It don’t make no difference where it was,” Joe said without turning his
head. “One place is just as good as another to run over a skunk.”

“I saw two skunks last night,” Nick said.

“Where?”

“Down by the lake. They were looking for dead fish along the beach.”

“They were coons probably,” Carl said.

“They were skunks. I guess I know skunks.”

“You ought to,” Carl said. “You got an Indian girl.”

“Stop talking that way, Carl,” said Mrs. Garner.

“Well, they smell about the same.”

Joe Garner laughed.

“You stop laughing, Joe,” Mrs. Garner said. “I won’t have Carl talk that
way.”

“Have you got an Indian girl, Nickie?” Joe asked.

“No.”

“He has too, Pa,” Frank said. “Prudence Mitchell’s his girl.”

“She’s not.”

“He goes to see her every day.”

“I don’t.” Nick, sitting between the two boys in the dark, felt hollow
and happy inside himself to be teased about Prudence Mitchell. “She
ain’t my girl,” he said.

“Listen to him,” said Carl. “I see them together every day.”

“Carl can’t get a girl,” his mother said, “not even a squaw.”

Carl was quiet.

“Carl ain’t no good with girls,” Frank said.

“You shut up.”

“You’re all right, Carl,” Joe Garner said. “Girls never got a man
anywhere. Look at your pa.”

“Yes, that’s what you would say,” Mrs. Garner moved close to Joe as the
wagon jolted. “Well, you had plenty of girls in your time.”

“I’ll bet Pa wouldn’t ever have had a squaw for a girl.”

“Don’t you think it,” Joe said. “You better watch out to keep Prudie,
Nick.”

His wife whispered to him and Joe laughed.

“What you laughing at?” asked Frank.

“Don’t you say it, Garner,” his wife warned. Joe laughed again.

“Nickie can have Prudence,” Joe Garner said. “I got a good girl.”

“That’s the way to talk,” Mrs. Garner said.

The horses were pulling heavily in the sand. Joe reached out in the dark
with the whip.

“Come on, pull into it. You’ll have to pull harder than this to-morrow.”

They trotted down the long hill, the wagon jolting. At the farmhouse
everybody got down. Mrs. Garner unlocked the door, went inside, and came
out with a lamp in her hand. Carl and Nick unloaded the things from the
back of the wagon. Frank sat on the front seat to drive to the barn and
put up the horses. Nick went up the steps and opened the kitchen door.
Mrs. Garner was building a fire in the stove. She turned from pouring
kerosene on the wood.

“Good-by, Mrs. Garner,” Nick said. “Thanks for taking me.”

“Oh shucks, Nickie.”

“I had a wonderful time.”

“We like to have you. Won’t you stay and eat some supper?”

“I better go. I think Dad probably waited for me.”

“Well, get along then. Send Carl up to the house, will you?”

“All right.”

“Good-night, Nickie.”

“Good-night, Mrs. Garner.”

Nick went out the farmyard and down to the barn. Joe and Frank were
milking.

“Good-night,” Nick said. “I had a swell time.”

“Good-night, Nick,” Joe Garner called. “Aren’t you going to stay and
eat?”

“No, I can’t. Will you tell Carl his mother wants him?”

“All right. Good-night, Nickie.”

Nick walked barefoot along the path through the meadow below the barn.
The path was smooth and the dew was cool on his bare feet. He climbed a
fence at the end of the meadow, went down through a ravine, his feet wet
in the swamp mud, and then climbed up through the dry beech woods until
he saw the lights of the cottage. He climbed over the fence and walked
around to the front porch. Through the window he saw his father sitting
by the table, reading in the light from the big lamp. Nick opened the
door and went in.

“Well, Nickie,” his father said, “was it a good day?”

“I had a swell time, Dad. It was a swell Fourth of July.”

“Are you hungry?”

“You bet.”

“What did you do with your shoes?”

“I left them in the wagon at Garner’s.”

“Come on out to the kitchen.”

Nick’s father went ahead with the lamp. He stopped and lifted the lid of
the ice-box. Nick went on into the kitchen. His father brought in a
piece of cold chicken on a plate and a pitcher of milk and put them on
the table before Nick. He put down the lamp.

“There’s some pie too,” he said. “Will that hold you?”

“It’s grand.”

His father sat down in a chair beside the oilcloth-covered table. He
made a big shadow on the kitchen wall.

“Who won the ball game?”

“Petoskey. Five to three.”

His father sat watching him eat and filled his glass from the
milk-pitcher. Nick drank and wiped his mouth on his napkin. His father
reached over to the shelf for the pie. He cut Nick a big piece. It was
huckleberry pie.

“What did you do, Dad?”

“I went out fishing in the morning.”

“What did you get?”

“Only perch.”

His father sat watching Nick eat the pie.

“What did you do this afternoon?” Nick asked.

“I went for a walk up by the Indian camp.”

“Did you see anybody?”

“The Indians were all in town getting drunk.”

“Didn’t you see anybody at all?”

“I saw your friend, Prudie.”

“Where was she?”

“She was in the woods with Frank Washburn. I ran onto them. They were
having quite a time.”

His father was not looking at him.

“What were they doing?”

“I didn’t stay to find out.”

“Tell me what they were doing.”

“I don’t know,” his father said. “I just heard them threshing around.”

“How did you know it was them?”

“I saw them.”

“I thought you said you didn’t see them.”

“Oh, yes, I saw them.”

“Who was it with her?” Nick asked.

“Frank Washburn.”

“Were they—were they——”

“Were they what?”

“Were they happy?”

“I guess so.”

His father got up from the table and went out the kitchen screen door.
When he came back Nick was looking at his plate. He had been crying.

“Have some more?” His father picked up the knife to cut the pie.

“No,” said Nick.

“You better have another piece.”

“No, I don’t want any.”

His father cleared off the table.

“Where were they in the woods?” Nick asked.

“Up back of the camp.” Nick looked at his plate. His father said, “You
better go to bed, Nick.”

“All right.”

Nick went into his room, undressed, and got into bed. He heard his
father moving around in the living-room. Nick lay in the bed with his
face in the pillow.

“My heart’s broken,” he thought. “If I feel this way my heart must be
broken.”

After a while he heard his father blow out the lamp and go into his own
room. He heard a wind come up in the trees outside and felt it come in
cool through the screen. He lay for a long time with his face in the
pillow, and after a while he forgot to think about Prudence and finally
he went to sleep. When he awoke in the night he heard the wind in the
hemlock trees outside the cottage and the waves of the lake coming in on
the shore, and he went back to sleep. In the morning there was a big
wind blowing and the waves were running high up on the beach and he was
awake a long time before he remembered that his heart was broken.




                            A CANARY FOR ONE


THE train passed very quickly a long, red stone house with a garden and
four thick palm-trees with tables under them in the shade. On the other
side was the sea. Then there was a cutting through red stone and clay,
and the sea was only occasionally and far below against rocks.

“I bought him in Palermo,” the American lady said. “We only had an hour
ashore and it was Sunday morning. The man wanted to be paid in dollars
and I gave him a dollar and a half. He really sings very beautifully.”

It was very hot in the train and it was very hot in the _lit salon_
compartment. There was no breeze came through the open window. The
American lady pulled the window-blind down and there was no more sea,
even occasionally. On the other side there was glass, then the corridor,
then an open window, and outside the window were dusty trees and an
oiled road and flat fields of grapes, with gray-stone hills behind them.

There was smoke from many tall chimneys—coming into Marseilles, and the
train slowed down and followed one track through many others into the
station. The train stayed twenty-five minutes in the station at
Marseilles and the American lady bought a copy of _The Daily Mail_ and a
half-bottle of Evian water. She walked a little way along the station
platform, but she stayed near the steps of the car because at Cannes,
where it stopped for twelve minutes, the train had left with no signal
of departure and she had only gotten on just in time. The American lady
was a little deaf and she was afraid that perhaps signals of departure
were given and that she did not hear them.

The train left the station in Marseilles and there was not only the
switch-yards and the factory smoke but, looking back, the town of
Marseilles and the harbor with stone hills behind it and the last of the
sun on the water. As it was getting dark the train passed a farmhouse
burning in a field. Motor-cars were stopped along the road and bedding
and things from inside the farmhouse were spread in the field. Many
people were watching the house burn. After it was dark the train was in
Avignon. People got on and off. At the news-stand Frenchmen, returning
to Paris, bought that day’s French papers. On the station platform were
negro soldiers. They wore brown uniforms and were tall and their faces
shone, close under the electric light. Their faces were very black and
they were too tall to stare. The train left Avignon station with the
negroes standing there. A short white sergeant was with them.

Inside the _lit salon_ compartment the porter had pulled down the three
beds from inside the wall and prepared them for sleeping. In the night
the American lady lay without sleeping because the train was a _rapide_
and went very fast and she was afraid of the speed in the night. The
American lady’s bed was the one next to the window. The canary from
Palermo, a cloth spread over his cage, was out of the draft in the
corridor that went into the compartment wash-room. There was a blue
light outside the compartment, and all night the train went very fast
and the American lady lay awake and waited for a wreck.

In the morning the train was near Paris, and after the American lady had
come out from the wash-room, looking very wholesome and middle-aged and
American in spite of not having slept, and had taken the cloth off the
birdcage and hung the cage in the sun, she went back to the
restaurant-car for breakfast. When she came back to the _lit salon_
compartment again, the beds had been pushed back into the wall and made
into seats, the canary was shaking his feathers in the sunlight that
came through the open window, and the train was much nearer Paris.

“He loves the sun,” the American lady said. “He’ll sing now in a little
while.”

The canary shook his feathers and pecked into them. “I’ve always loved
birds,” the American lady said. “I’m taking him home to my little girl.
There—he’s singing now.”

The canary chirped and the feathers on his throat stood out, then he
dropped his bill and pecked into his feathers again. The train crossed a
river and passed through a very carefully tended forest. The train
passed through many outside of Paris towns. There were tram-cars in the
towns and big advertisements for the Belle Jardinière and Dubonnet and
Pernod on the walls toward the train. All that the train passed through
looked as though it were before breakfast. For several minutes I had not
listened to the American lady, who was talking to my wife.

“Is your husband American too?” asked the lady.

“Yes,” said my wife. “We’re both Americans.”

“I thought you were English.”

“Oh, no.”

“Perhaps that was because I wore braces,” I said. I had started to say
suspenders and changed it to braces in the mouth, to keep my English
character. The American lady did not hear. She was really quite deaf;
she read lips, and I had not looked toward her. I had looked out of the
window. She went on talking to my wife.

“I’m so glad you’re Americans. American men make the best husbands,” the
American lady was saying. “That was why we left the Continent, you know.
My daughter fell in love with a man in Vevey.” She stopped. “They were
simply madly in love.” She stopped again. “I took her away, of course.”

“Did she get over it?” asked my wife.

“I don’t think so,” said the American lady. “She wouldn’t eat anything
and she wouldn’t sleep at all. I’ve tried so very hard, but she doesn’t
seem to take an interest in anything. She doesn’t care about things. I
couldn’t have her marrying a foreigner.” She paused. “Some one, a very
good friend, told me once, ‘No foreigner can make an American girl a
good husband.’”

“No,” said my wife, “I suppose not.”

The American lady admired my wife’s travelling-coat, and it turned out
that the American lady had bought her own clothes for twenty years now
from the same maison de couturier in the Rue Saint Honoré. They had her
measurements, and a vendeuse who knew her and her tastes picked the
dresses out for her and they were sent to America. They came to the
post-office near where she lived up-town in New York, and the duty was
never exorbitant because they opened the dresses there in the
post-office to appraise them and they were always very simple-looking
and with no gold lace nor ornaments that would make the dresses look
expensive. Before the present vendeuse, named Thérèse, there had been
another vendeuse, named Amélie. Altogether there had only been these two
in the twenty years. It had always been the same couturier. Prices,
however, had gone up. The exchange, though, equalized that. They had her
daughter’s measurements now too. She was grown up and there was not much
chance of their changing now.

The train was now coming into Paris. The fortifications were levelled
but grass had not grown. There were many cars standing on tracks—brown
wooden restaurant-cars and brown wooden sleeping-cars that would go to
Italy at five o’clock that night, if that train still left at five; the
cars were marked Paris-Rome, and cars, with seats on the roofs, that
went back and forth to the suburbs with, at certain hours, people in all
the seats and on the roofs, if that were the way it were still done, and
passing were the white walls and many windows of houses. Nothing had
eaten any breakfast.

“Americans make the best husbands,” the American lady said to my wife. I
was getting down the bags. “American men are the only men in the world
to marry.”

“How long ago did you leave Vevey?” asked my wife.

“Two years ago this fall. It’s her, you know, that I’m taking the canary
to.”

“Was the man your daughter was in love with a Swiss?”

“Yes,” said the American lady. “He was from a very good family in Vevey.
He was going to be an engineer. They met there in Vevey. They used to go
on long walks together.”

“I know Vevey,” said my wife. “We were there on our honeymoon.”

“Were you really? That must have been lovely. I had no idea, of course,
that she’d fall in love with him.”

“It was a very lovely place,” said my wife.

“Yes,” said the American lady. “Isn’t it lovely? Where did you stop
there?”

“We stayed at the Trois Couronnes,” said my wife.

“It’s such a fine old hotel,” said the American lady.

“Yes,” said my wife. “We had a very fine room and in the fall the
country was lovely.”

“Were you there in the fall?”

“Yes,” said my wife.

We were passing three cars that had been in a wreck. They were
splintered open and the roofs sagged in.

“Look,” I said. “There’s been a wreck.”

The American lady looked and saw the last car. “I was afraid of just
that all night,” she said. “I have terrific presentiments about things
sometimes. I’ll never travel on a _rapide_ again at night. There must be
other comfortable trains that don’t go so fast.”

Then the train was in the dark of the Gare de Lyons, and then stopped
and porters came up to the windows. I handed bags through the windows,
and we were out on the dim longness of the platform, and the American
lady put herself in charge of one of three men from Cook’s who said:
“Just a moment, madame, and I’ll look for your name.”

The porter brought a truck and piled on the baggage, and my wife said
good-by and I said good-by to the American lady, whose name had been
found by the man from Cook’s on a typewritten page in a sheaf of
typewritten pages which he replaced in his pocket.

We followed the porter with the truck down the long cement platform
beside the train. At the end was a gate and a man took the tickets.

We were returning to Paris to set up separate residences.




                            AN ALPINE IDYLL


IT was hot coming down into the valley even in the early morning. The
sun melted the snow from the skis we were carrying and dried the wood.
It was spring in the valley but the sun was very hot. We came along the
road into Galtur carrying our skis and rucksacks. As we passed the
churchyard a burial was just over. I said, “Grüss Gott,” to the priest
as he walked past us coming out of the churchyard. The priest bowed.

“It’s funny a priest never speaks to you,” John said.

“You’d think they’d like to say ‘Grüss Gott.’”

“They never answer,” John said.

We stopped in the road and watched the sexton shovelling in the new
earth. A peasant with a black beard and high leather boots stood beside
the grave. The sexton stopped shovelling and straightened his back. The
peasant in the high boots took the spade from the sexton and went on
filling in the grave—spreading the earth evenly as a man spreading
manure in a garden. In the bright May morning the grave-filling looked
unreal. I could not imagine any one being dead.

“Imagine being buried on a day like this,” I said to John.

“I wouldn’t like it.”

“Well,” I said, “we don’t have to do it.”

We went on up the road past the houses of the town to the inn. We had
been skiing in the Silvretta for a month, and it was good to be down in
the valley. In the Silvretta the skiing had been all right, but it was
spring skiing, the snow was good only in the early morning and again in
the evening. The rest of the time it was spoiled by the sun. We were
both tired of the sun. You could not get away from the sun. The only
shadows were made by rocks or by the hut that was built under the
protection of a rock beside a glacier, and in the shade the sweat froze
in your underclothing. You could not sit outside the hut without dark
glasses. It was pleasant to be burned black but the sun had been very
tiring. You could not rest in it. I was glad to be down away from snow.
It was too late in the spring to be up in the Silvretta. I was a little
tired of skiing. We had stayed too long. I could taste the snow water we
had been drinking melted off the tin roof of the hut. The taste was a
part of the way I felt about skiing. I was glad there were other things
beside skiing, and I was glad to be down, away from the unnatural high
mountain spring, into this May morning in the valley.

The innkeeper sat on the porch of the inn, his chair tipped back against
the wall. Beside him sat the cook.

“Ski-heil!” said the innkeeper.

“Heil!” we said and leaned the skis against the wall and took off our
packs.

“How was it up above?” asked the innkeeper.

“Schön. A little too much sun.”

“Yes. There’s too much sun this time of year.”

The cook sat on in his chair. The innkeeper went in with us and unlocked
his office and brought out our mail. There was a bundle of letters and
some papers.

“Let’s get some beer,” John said.

“Good. We’ll drink it inside.”

The proprietor brought two bottles and we drank them while we read the
letters.

“We better have some more beer,” John said. A girl brought it this time.
She smiled as she opened the bottles.

“Many letters,” she said.

“Yes. Many.”

“Prosit,” she said and went out, taking the empty bottles.

“I’d forgotten what beer tasted like.”

“I hadn’t,” John said. “Up in the hut I used to think about it a lot.”

“Well,” I said, “we’ve got it now.”

“You oughtn’t to ever do anything too long.”

“No. We were up there too long.”

“Too damn long,” John said. “It’s no good doing a thing too long.”

The sun came through the open window and shone through the beer bottles
on the table. The bottles were half full. There was a little froth on
the beer in the bottles, not much because it was very cold. It collared
up when you poured it into the tall glasses. I looked out of the open
window at the white road. The trees beside the road were dusty. Beyond
was a green field and a stream. There were trees along the stream and a
mill with a water wheel. Through the open side of the mill I saw a long
log and a saw in it rising and falling. No one seemed to be tending it.
There were four crows walking in the green field. One crow sat in a tree
watching. Outside on the porch the cook got off his chair and passed
into the hall that led back into the kitchen. Inside, the sunlight shone
through the empty glasses on the table. John was leaning forward with
his head on his arms.

Through the window I saw two men come up the front steps. They came into
the drinking room. One was the bearded peasant in the high boots. The
other was the sexton. They sat down at the table under the window. The
girl came in and stood by their table. The peasant did not seem to see
her. He sat with his hands on the table. He wore his old army clothes.
There were patches on the elbows.

“What will it be?” asked the sexton. The peasant did not pay any
attention.

“What will you drink?”

“Schnapps,” the peasant said.

“And a quarter litre of red wine,” the sexton told the girl.

The girl brought the drinks and the peasant drank the schnapps. He
looked out of the window. The sexton watched him. John had his head
forward on the table. He was asleep.

The innkeeper came in and went over to the table. He spoke in dialect
and the sexton answered him. The peasant looked out of the window. The
innkeeper went out of the room. The peasant stood up. He took a folded
ten-thousand kronen note out of a leather pocket-book and unfolded it.
The girl came up.

“Alles?” she asked.

“Alles,” he said.

“Let me buy the wine,” the sexton said.

“Alles,” the peasant repeated to the girl. She put her hand in the
pocket of her apron, brought it out full of coins and counted out the
change. The peasant went out the door. As soon as he was gone the
innkeeper came into the room again and spoke to the sexton. He sat down
at the table. They talked in dialect. The sexton was amused. The
innkeeper was disgusted. The sexton stood up from the table. He was a
little man with a mustache. He leaned out of the window and looked up
the road.

“There he goes in,” he said.

“In the Löwen?”

“Ja.”

They talked again and then the innkeeper came over to our table. The
innkeeper was a tall man and old. He looked at John asleep.

“He’s pretty tired.”

“Yes, we were up early.”

“Will you want to eat soon?”

“Any time,” I said. “What is there to eat?”

“Anything you want. The girl will bring the eating-card.”

The girl brought the menu. John woke up. The menu was written in ink on
a card and the card slipped into a wooden paddle.

“There’s the speise-karte,” I said to John. He looked at it. He was
still sleepy.

“Won’t you have a drink with us?” I asked the innkeeper. He sat down.
“Those peasants are beasts,” said the innkeeper.

“We saw that one at a funeral coming into town.”

“That was his wife.”

“Oh.”

“He’s a beast. All these peasants are beasts.”

“How do you mean?”

“You wouldn’t believe it. You wouldn’t believe what just happened about
that one.”

“Tell me.”

“You wouldn’t believe it.” The innkeeper spoke to the sexton. “Franz,
come over here.” The sexton came, bringing his little bottle of wine and
his glass.

“The gentlemen are just come down from the Wiesbadenerhütte,” the
innkeeper said. We shook hands.

“What will you drink?” I asked.

“Nothing,” Franz shook his finger.

“Another quarter litre?”

“All right.”

“Do you understand dialect?” the innkeeper asked.

“No.”

“What’s it all about?” John asked.

“He’s going to tell us about the peasant we saw filling the grave,
coming into town.”

“I can’t understand it, anyway,” John said. “It goes too fast for me.”

“That peasant,” the innkeeper said, “to-day he brought his wife in to be
buried. She died last November.”

“December,” said the sexton.

“That makes nothing. She died last December then, and he notified the
commune.”

“December eighteenth,” said the sexton.

“Anyway, he couldn’t bring her over to be buried until the snow was
gone.”

“He lives on the other side of the Paznaun,” said the sexton. “But he
belongs to this parish.”

“He couldn’t bring her out at all?” I asked.

“No. He can only come, from where he lives, on skis until the snow
melts. So to-day he brought her in to be buried and the priest, when he
looked at her face, didn’t want to bury her. You go on and tell it,” he
said to the sexton. “Speak German, not dialect.”

“It was very funny with the priest,” said the sexton. “In the report to
the commune she died of heart trouble. We knew she had heart trouble
here. She used to faint in church sometimes. She did not come for a long
time. She wasn’t strong to climb. When the priest uncovered her face he
asked Olz, ‘Did your wife suffer much?’ ‘No,’ said Olz. ‘When I came in
the house she was dead across the bed.’

“The priest looked at her again. He didn’t like it.

“‘How did her face get that way?’

“‘I don’t know,’ Olz said.

“‘You’d better find out,’ the priest said, and put the blanket back. Olz
didn’t say anything. The priest looked at him. Olz looked back at the
priest. ‘You want to know?’

“‘I must know,’ the priest said.”

“This is where it’s good,” the innkeeper said. “Listen to this. Go on
Franz.”

“‘Well,’ said Olz, ‘when she died I made the report to the commune and I
put her in the shed across the top of the big wood. When I started to
use the big wood she was stiff and I put her up against the wall. Her
mouth was open and when I came into the shed at night to cut up the big
wood, I hung the lantern from it.’

“‘Why did you do that?’ asked the priest.

“‘I don’t know,’ said Olz.

“‘Did you do that many times?’

“‘Every time I went to work in the shed at night.’

“‘It was very wrong,’ said the priest. ‘Did you love your wife?’

“‘Ja, I loved her,’ Olz said. ‘I loved her fine.’”

“Did you understand it all?” asked the innkeeper. “You understand it all
about his wife?”

“I heard it.”

“How about eating?” John asked.

“You order,” I said. “Do you think it’s true?” I asked the innkeeper.

“Sure it’s true,” he said. “These peasants are beasts.”

“Where did he go now?”

“He’s gone to drink at my colleague’s, the Löwen.”

“He didn’t want to drink with me,” said the sexton.

“He didn’t want to drink with me, after he knew about his wife,” said
the innkeeper.

“Say,” said John. “How about eating?”

“All right,” I said.




                             A PURSUIT RACE


WILLIAM CAMPBELL had been in a pursuit race with a burlesque show ever
since Pittsburgh. In a pursuit race, in bicycle racing, riders start at
equal intervals to ride after one another. They ride very fast because
the race is usually limited to a short distance and if they slow their
riding another rider who maintains his pace will make up the space that
separated them equally at the start. As soon as a rider is caught and
passed he is out of the race and must get down from his bicycle and
leave the track. If none of the riders are caught the winner of the race
is the one who has gained the most distance. In most pursuit races, if
there are only two riders, one of the riders is caught inside of six
miles. The burlesque show caught William Campbell at Kansas City.

William Campbell had hoped to hold a slight lead over the burlesque show
until they reached the Pacific coast. As long as he preceded the
burlesque show as advance man he was being paid. When the burlesque show
caught up with him he was in bed. He was in bed when the manager of the
burlesque troupe came into his room and after the manager had gone out
he decided that he might as well stay in bed. It was very cold in Kansas
City and he was in no hurry to go out. He did not like Kansas City. He
reached under the bed for a bottle and drank. It made his stomach feel
better. Mr. Turner, the manager of the burlesque show, had refused a
drink.

William Campbell’s interview with Mr. Turner had been a little strange.
Mr. Turner had knocked on the door. Campbell had said: “Come in!” When
Mr. Turner came into the room he saw clothing on a chair, an open
suitcase, the bottle on a chair beside the bed, and some one lying in
the bed completely covered by the bed-clothes.

“Mister Campbell,” Mr. Turner said.

“You can’t fire me,” William Campbell said from underneath the covers.
It was warm and white and close under the covers. “You can’t fire me
because I’ve got down off my bicycle.”

“You’re drunk,” Mr. Turner said.

“Oh, yes,” William Campbell said, speaking directly against the sheet
and feeling the texture with his lips.

“You’re a fool,” Mr. Turner said. He turned off the electric light. The
electric light had been burning all night. It was now ten o’clock in the
morning. “You’re a drunken fool. When did you get into this town?”

“I got into this town last night,” William Campbell said, speaking
against the sheet. He found he liked to talk through a sheet. “Did you
ever talk through a sheet?”

“Don’t try to be funny. You aren’t funny.”

“I’m not being funny. I’m just talking through a sheet.”

“You’re talking through a sheet all right.”

“You can go now, Mr. Turner,” Campbell said. “I don’t work for you any
more.”

“You know that anyway.”

“I know a lot,” William Campbell said. He pulled down the sheet and
looked at Mr. Turner. “I know enough so I don’t mind looking at you at
all. Do you want to hear what I know?”

“No.”

“Good,” said William Campbell. “Because really I don’t know anything at
all. I was just talking.” He pulled the sheet up over his face again. “I
love it under a sheet,” he said. Mr. Turner stood beside the bed. He was
a middle-aged man with a large stomach and a bald head and he had many
things to do. “You ought to stop off here, Billy, and take a cure,” he
said. “I’ll fix it up if you want to do it.”

“I don’t want to take a cure,” William Campbell said. “I don’t want to
take a cure at all. I am perfectly happy. All my life I have been
perfectly happy.”

“How long have you been this way?”

“What a question!” William Campbell breathed in and out through the
sheet.

“How long have you been stewed, Billy?”

“Haven’t I done my work?”

“Sure. I just asked you how long you’ve been stewed, Billy.”

“I don’t know. But I’ve got my wolf back,” he touched the sheet with his
tongue. “I’ve had him for a week.”

“The hell you have.”

“Oh, yes. My dear wolf. Every time I take a drink he goes outside the
room. He can’t stand alcohol. The poor little fellow.” He moved his
tongue round and round on the sheet. “He’s a lovely wolf. He’s just like
he always was.” William Campbell shut his eyes and took a deep breath.

“You got to take a cure, Billy,” Mr. Turner said. “You won’t mind the
Keeley. It isn’t bad.”

“The Keeley,” William Campbell said. “It isn’t far from London.” He shut
his eyes and opened them, moving the eyelashes against the sheet. “I
just love sheets,” he said. He looked at Mr. Turner.

“Listen, you think I’m drunk.”

“You _are_ drunk.”

“No, I’m not.”

“You’re drunk and you’ve had dt’s.”

“No.” William Campbell held the sheet around his head. “Dear sheet,” he
said. He breathed against it gently. “Pretty sheet. You love me, don’t
you, sheet? It’s all in the price of the room. Just like in Japan. No,”
he said. “Listen Billy, dear Sliding Billy, I have a surprise for you.
I’m not drunk. I’m hopped to the eyes.”

“No,” said Mr. Turner.

“Take a look.” William Campbell pulled up the right sleeve of his pyjama
jacket under the sheet, then shoved the right forearm out. “Look at
that.” On the forearm, from just above the wrist to the elbow, were
small blue circles around tiny dark blue punctures. The circles almost
touched one another. “That’s the new development,” William Campbell
said. “I drink a little now once in a while, just to drive the wolf out
of the room.”

“They got a cure for that, ‘Sliding Billy’” Turner said.

“No,” William Campbell said. “They haven’t got a cure for anything.”

“You can’t just quit like that, Billy,” Turner said. He sat on the bed.

“Be careful of my sheet,” William Campbell said.

“You can’t just quit at your age and take to pumping yourself full of
that stuff just because you got in a jam.”

“There’s a law against it. If that’s what you mean.”

“No, I mean you got to fight it out.”

Billy Campbell caressed the sheet with his lips and his tongue. “Dear
sheet,” he said. “I can kiss this sheet and see right through it at the
same time.”

“Cut it out about the sheet. You can’t just take to that stuff, Billy.”

William Campbell shut his eyes. He was beginning to feel a slight
nausea. He knew that this nausea would increase steadily, without there
ever being the relief of sickness, until something were done against it.
It was at this point that he suggested that Mr. Turner have a drink. Mr.
Turner declined. William Campbell took a drink from the bottle. It was a
temporary measure. Mr. Turner watched him. Mr. Turner had been in this
room much longer than he should have been, he had many things to do;
although living in daily association with people who used drugs, he had
a horror of drugs, and he was very fond of William Campbell; he did not
wish to leave him. He was very sorry for him and he felt a cure might
help. He knew there were good cures in Kansas City. But he had to go. He
stood up.

“Listen, Billy,” William Campbell said, “I want to tell you something.
You’re called ‘Sliding Billy.’ That’s because you can slide. I’m called
just Billy. That’s because I never could slide at all. I can’t slide,
Billy. I can’t slide. It just catches. Every time I try it, it catches.”
He shut his eyes. “I can’t slide, Billy. It’s awful when you can’t
slide.”

“Yes,” said “Sliding Billy” Turner.

“Yes, what?” William Campbell looked at him.

“You were saying.”

“No,” said William Campbell. “I wasn’t saying. It must have been a
mistake.”

“You were saying about sliding.”

“No. It couldn’t have been about sliding. But listen, Billy, and I’ll
tell you a secret. Stick to sheets, Billy. Keep away from women and
horses and, and—” he stopped “—eagles, Billy. If you love horses
you’ll get horse-s—, and if you love eagles you’ll get eagle-s—.” He
stopped and put his head under the sheet.

“I got to go,” said “Sliding Billy” Turner.

“If you love women you’ll get a dose,” William Campbell said. “If you
love horses——”

“Yes, you said that.”

“Said what?”

“About horses and eagles.”

“Oh, yes. And if you love sheets.” He breathed on the sheet and stroked
his nose against it. “I don’t know about sheets,” he said. “I just
started to love this sheet.”

“I have to go,” Mr. Turner said. “I got a lot to do.”

“That’s all right,” William Campbell said. “Everybody’s got to go.”

“I better go.”

“All right, you go.”

“Are you all right, Billy?”

“I was never so happy in my life.”

“And you’re all right?”

“I’m fine. You go along. I’ll just lie here for a little while. Around
noon I’ll get up.”

But when Mr. Turner came up to William Campbell’s room at noon William
Campbell was sleeping and as Mr. Turner was a man who knew what things
in life were very valuable he did not wake him.




                            TO-DAY IS FRIDAY


    _Three Roman soldiers are in a drinking-place at eleven o’clock
    at night. There are barrels around the wall. Behind the wooden
    counter is a Hebrew wine-seller. The three Roman soldiers are a
    little cock-eyed._

_1st Roman Soldier_—You tried the red?

_2d Soldier_—No, I ain’t tried it.

_1st Soldier_—You better try it.

_2d Soldier_—All right, George, we’ll have a round of the red.

_Hebrew Wine-seller_—Here you are, gentlemen. You’ll like that. [_He
sets down an earthenware pitcher that he has filled from one of the
casks._] That’s a nice little wine.

_1st Soldier_—Have a drink of it yourself. [_He turns to the third
Roman soldier who is leaning on a barrel._] What’s the matter with you?

_3d Roman Soldier_—I got a gut-ache.

_2d Soldier_—You’ve been drinking water.

_1st Soldier_—Try some of the red.

_3d Soldier_—I can’t drink the damn stuff. It makes my gut sour.

_1st Soldier_—You been out here too long.

_3d Soldier_—Hell, don’t I know it?

_1st Soldier_—Say, George, can’t you give this gentleman something to
fix up his stomach?

_Hebrew Wine-seller_—I got it right here.

    [_The third Roman soldier tastes the cup that the wine-seller
    has mixed for him._]

_3d Soldier_—Hey, what you put in that, camel chips?

_Wine-seller_—You drink that right down, Lootenant. That’ll fix you up
right.

_3d Soldier_—Well, I couldn’t feel any worse.

_1st Soldier_—Take a chance on it. George fixed me up fine the other
day.

_Wine-seller_—You were in bad shape, Lootenant. I know what fixes up a
bad stomach.

    [_The third Roman soldier drinks the cup down._]

_3d Roman Soldier_—Jesus Christ. [_He makes a face._]

_2d Soldier_—That false alarm!

_1st Soldier_—Oh, I don’t know. He was pretty good in there to-day.

_2d Soldier_—Why didn’t he come down off the cross?

_1st Soldier_—He didn’t want to come down off the cross. That’s not his
play.

_2d Soldier_—Show me a guy that doesn’t want to come down off the
cross.

_1st Soldier_—Aw, hell, you don’t know anything about it. Ask George
there. Did he want to come down off the cross, George?

_Wine-seller_—I’ll tell you, gentlemen, I wasn’t out there. It’s a
thing I haven’t taken any interest in.

_2d Soldier_—Listen, I seen a lot of them—here and plenty of other
places. Any time you show me one that doesn’t want to get down off the
cross when the time comes—when the time comes, I mean—I’ll climb right
up with him.

_1st Soldier_—I thought he was pretty good in there to-day.

_3d Soldier_—He was all right.

_2d Roman Soldier_—You guys don’t know what I’m talking about. I’m not
saying whether he was good or not. What I mean is, when the time comes.
When they first start nailing him, there isn’t none of them wouldn’t
stop it if they could.

_1st Soldier_—Didn’t you follow it, George?

_Wine-seller_—No, I didn’t take any interest in it, Lootenant.

_1st Soldier_—I was surprised how he acted.

_3d Soldier_—The part I don’t like is the nailing them on. You know,
that must get to you pretty bad.

_2d Soldier_—It isn’t that that’s so bad, as when they first lift ’em
up. [_He makes a lifting gesture with his two palms together._] When the
weight starts to pull on ’em. That’s when it gets ’em.

_3d Roman Soldier_—It takes some of them pretty bad.

_1st Soldier_—Ain’t I seen ’em? I seen plenty of them. I tell you, he
was pretty good in there to-day.

    [_The second Roman soldier smiles at the Hebrew wine-seller._]

_2d Soldier_—You’re a regular Christer, big boy.

_1st Soldier_—Sure, go on and kid him. But listen while I tell you
something. He was pretty good in there to-day.

_2d Soldier_—What about some more wine?

    [_The wine-seller looks up expectantly. The third Roman soldier
    is sitting with his head down. He does not look well._]

_3d Soldier_—I don’t want any more.

_2d Soldier_—Just for two, George.

    [_The wine-seller puts out a pitcher of wine, a size smaller
    than the last one. He leans forward on the wooden counter._]

_1st Roman Soldier_—You see his girl?

_2d Soldier_—Wasn’t I standing right by her?

_1st Soldier_—She’s a nice-looker.

_2d Soldier_—I knew her before he did. [_He winks at the wine-seller._]

_1st Soldier_—I used to see her around the town.

_2d Soldier_—She used to have a lot of stuff. He never brought _her_ no
good luck.

_1st Soldier_—Oh, he ain’t lucky. But he looked pretty good to me in
there to-day.

_2d Soldier_—What become of his gang?

_1st Soldier_—Oh, they faded out. Just the women stuck by him.

_2d Roman Soldier_—They were a pretty yellow crowd. When they seen him
go up there they didn’t want any of it.

_1st Soldier_—The women stuck all right.

_2d Soldier_—Sure, they stuck all right.

_1st Roman Soldier_—You see me slip the old spear into him?

_2d Roman Soldier_—You’ll get into trouble doing that some day.

_1st Soldier_—It was the least I could do for him. I’ll tell you he
looked pretty good to me in there to-day.

_Hebrew Wine-seller_—Gentlemen, you know I got to close.

_1st Roman Soldier_—We’ll have one more round.

_2d Roman Soldier_—What’s the use? This stuff don’t get you anywhere.
Come on, let’s go.

_1st Soldier_—Just another round.

_3d Roman Soldier_—[_Getting up from the barrel._] No, come on. Let’s
go. I feel like hell to-night.

_1st Soldier_—Just one more.

_2d Soldier_—No, come on. We’re going to go. Good-night, George. Put it
on the bill.

_Wine-seller_—Good-night, gentlemen. [_He looks a little worried._] You
couldn’t let me have a little something on account, Lootenant?

_2d Roman Soldier_—What the hell, George! Wednesday’s pay-day.

_Wine-seller_—It’s all right, Lootenant. Good-night, gentlemen.

    [_The three Roman soldiers go out the door into the street._]

    [_Outside in the street._]

_2d Roman Soldier_—George is a kike just like all the rest of them.

_1st Roman Soldier_—Oh, George is a nice fella.

_2d Soldier_—Everybody’s a nice fella to you to-night.

_3d Roman Soldier_—Come on, let’s go up to the barracks. I feel like
hell to-night.

_2d Soldier_—You been out here too long.

_3d Roman Soldier_—No, it ain’t just that. I feel like hell.

_2d Soldier_—You been out here too long. That’s all.

                                CURTAIN.




                              BANAL STORY


So he ate an orange, slowly spitting out the seeds. Outside, the snow
was turning to rain. Inside, the electric stove seemed to give no heat
and rising from his writing-table, he sat down upon the stove. How good
it felt! Here, at last, was life.

He reached for another orange. Far away in Paris, Mascart had knocked
Danny Frush cuckoo in the second round. Far off in Mesopotamia,
twenty-one feet of snow had fallen. Across the world in distant
Australia, the English cricketers were sharpening up their wickets.
_There_ was Romance.

Patrons of the arts and letters have discovered _The Forum_, he read. It
is the guide, philosopher, and friend of the thinking minority. Prize
short-stories—will their authors write our best-sellers of to-morrow?

You will enjoy these warm, homespun, American tales, bits of real life
on the open ranch, in crowded tenement or comfortable home, and all with
a healthy undercurrent of humor.

I must read them, he thought.

He read on. Our children’s children—what of them? Who of them? New
means must be discovered to find room for us under the sun. Shall this
be done by war or can it be done by peaceful methods?

Or will we all have to move to Canada?

Our deepest convictions—will Science upset them? Our civilization—is
it inferior to older orders of things?

And meanwhile, in the far-off dripping jungles of Yucatan, sounded the
chopping of the axes of the gum-choppers.

Do we want big men—or do we want them cultured? Take Joyce. Take
President Coolidge. What star must our college students aim at? There is
Jack Britton. There is Dr. Henry Van Dyke. Can we reconcile the two?
Take the case of Young Stribling.

And what of our daughters who must make their own Soundings? Nancy
Hawthorne is obliged to make her own Soundings in the sea of life.
Bravely and sensibly she faces the problems which come to every girl of
eighteen.

It was a splendid booklet.

Are you a girl of eighteen? Take the case of Joan of Arc. Take the case
of Bernard Shaw. Take the case of Betsy Ross.

Think of these things in 1925—Was there a risqué page in Puritan
history? Were there two sides to Pocahontas? Did he have a fourth
dimension?

Are modern paintings—and poetry—Art? Yes and No. Take Picasso.

Have tramps codes of conduct? Send your mind adventuring.

There is Romance everywhere. _Forum_ writers talk to the point, are
possessed of humor and wit. But they do not try to be smart and are
never long-winded.

Live the full life of the mind, exhilarated by new ideas, intoxicated by
the Romance of the unusual. He laid down the booklet.

And meanwhile, stretched flat on a bed in a darkened room in his house
in Triana, Manuel Garcia Maera lay with a tube in each lung, drowning
with the pneumonia. All the papers in Andalucia devoted special
supplements to his death, which had been expected for some days. Men and
boys bought full-length colored pictures of him to remember him by, and
lost the picture they had of him in their memories by looking at the
lithographs. Bull-fighters were very relieved he was dead, because he
did always in the bull-ring the things they could only do sometimes.
They all marched in the rain behind his coffin and there were one
hundred and forty-seven bull-fighters followed him out to the cemetery,
where they buried him in the tomb next to Joselito. After the funeral
every one sat in the cafés out of the rain, and many colored pictures of
Maera were sold to men who rolled them up and put them away in their
pockets.




                              NOW I LAY ME


THAT night we lay on the floor in the room and I listened to the
silk-worms eating. The silk-worms fed in racks of mulberry leaves and
all night you could hear them eating and a dropping sound in the leaves.
I myself did not want to sleep because I had been living for a long time
with the knowledge that if I ever shut my eyes in the dark and let
myself go, my soul would go out of my body. I had been that way for a
long time, ever since I had been blown up at night and felt it go out of
me and go off and then come back. I tried never to think about it, but
it had started to go since, in the nights, just at the moment of going
off to sleep, and I could only stop it by a very great effort. So while
now I am fairly sure that it would not really have gone out, yet then,
that summer, I was unwilling to make the experiment.

I had different ways of occupying myself while I lay awake. I would
think of a trout stream I had fished along when I was a boy and fish its
whole length very carefully in my mind; fishing very carefully under all
the logs, all the turns of the bank, the deep holes and the clear
shallow stretches, sometimes catching trout and sometimes losing them. I
would stop fishing at noon to eat my lunch; sometimes on a log over the
stream; sometimes on a high bank under a tree, and I always ate my lunch
very slowly and watched the stream below me while I ate. Often I ran out
of bait because I would take only ten worms with me in a tobacco tin
when I started. When I had used them all I had to find more worms, and
sometimes it was very difficult digging in the bank of the stream where
the cedar trees kept out the sun and there was no grass but only the
bare moist earth and often I could find no worms. Always though I found
some kind of bait, but one time in the swamp I could find no bait at all
and had to cut up one of the trout I had caught and use him for bait.

Sometimes I found insects in the swamp meadows, in the grass or under
ferns, and used them. There were beetles and insects with legs like
grass stems, and grubs in old rotten logs; white grubs with brown
pinching heads that would not stay on the hook and emptied into nothing
in the cold water, and wood ticks under logs where sometimes I found
angle-worms that slipped into the ground as soon as the log was raised.
Once I used a salamander from under an old log. The salamander was very
small and neat and agile and a lovely color. He had tiny feet that tried
to hold on to the hook, and after that one time I never used a
salamander, although I found them very often. Nor did I use crickets,
because of the way they acted about the hook.

Sometimes the stream ran through an open meadow, and in the dry grass I
would catch grasshoppers and use them for bait and sometimes I would
catch grasshoppers and toss them into the stream and watch them float
along swimming on the stream and circling on the surface as the current
took them and then disappear as a trout rose. Sometimes I would fish
four or five different streams in the night; starting as near as I could
get to their source and fishing them down stream. When I had finished
too quickly and the time did not go, I would fish the stream over again,
starting where it emptied into the lake and fishing back up stream,
trying for all the trout I had missed coming down. Some nights too I
made up streams, and some of them were very exciting, and it was like
being awake and dreaming. Some of those streams I still remember and
think that I have fished in them, and they are confused with streams I
really know. I gave them all names and went to them on the train and
sometimes walked for miles to get to them.

But some nights I could not fish, and on those nights I was cold-awake
and said my prayers over and over and tried to pray for all the people I
had ever known. That took up a great amount of time, for if you try to
remember all the people you have ever known, going back to the earliest
thing you remember—which was, with me, the attic of the house where I
was born and my mother and father’s wedding-cake in a tin box hanging
from one of the rafters, and, in the attic, jars of snakes and other
specimens that my father had collected as a boy and preserved in
alcohol, the alcohol sunken in the jars so the backs of some of the
snakes and specimens were exposed and had turned white—if you thought
back that far, you remembered a great many people. If you prayed for all
of them, saying a Hail Mary and an Our Father for each one, it took a
long time and finally it would be light, and then you could go to sleep,
if you were in a place where you could sleep in the daylight.

On those nights I tried to remember everything that had ever happened to
me, starting with just before I went to the war and remembering back
from one thing to another. I found I could only remember back to that
attic in my grandfather’s house. Then I would start there and remember
this way again, until I reached the war.

I remembered, after my grandfather died we moved away from that house
and to a new house designed and built by my mother. Many things that
were not to be moved were burned in the back-yard and I remember those
jars from the attic being thrown in the fire, and how they popped in the
heat and the fire flamed up from the alcohol. I remember the snakes
burning in the fire in the back-yard. But there were no people in that,
only things. I could not remember who burned the things even, and I
would go on until I came to people and then stop and pray for them.

About the new house I remembered how my mother was always cleaning
things out and making a good clearance. One time when my father was away
on a hunting trip she made a good thorough cleaning out in the basement
and burned everything that should not have been there. When my father
came home and got down from his buggy and hitched the horse, the fire
was still burning in the road beside the house. I went out to meet him.
He handed me his shotgun and looked at the fire. “What’s this?” he
asked.

“I’ve been cleaning out the basement, dear,” my mother said from the
porch. She was standing there smiling, to meet him. My father looked at
the fire and kicked at something. Then he leaned over and picked
something out of the ashes. “Get a rake, Nick,” he said to me. I went to
the basement and brought a rake and my father raked very carefully in
the ashes. He raked out stone axes and stone skinning knives and tools
for making arrow-heads and pieces of pottery and many arrow-heads. They
had all been blackened and chipped by the fire. My father raked them all
out very carefully and spread them on the grass by the road. His shotgun
in its leather case and his game-bags were on the grass where he had
left them when he stepped down from the buggy.

“Take the gun and the bags in the house, Nick, and bring me a paper,” he
said. My mother had gone inside the house. I took the shotgun, which was
heavy to carry and banged against my legs, and the two game-bags and
started toward the house. “Take them one at a time,” my father said.
“Don’t try and carry too much at once.” I put down the game-bags and
took in the shotgun and brought out a newspaper from the pile in my
father’s office. My father spread all the blackened, chipped stone
implements on the paper and then wrapped them up. “The best arrow-heads
went all to pieces,” he said. He walked into the house with the paper
package and I stayed outside on the grass with the two game-bags. After
a while I took them in. In remembering that, there were only two people,
so I would pray for them both.

Some nights, though, I could not remember my prayers even. I could only
get as far as “On earth as it is in heaven” and then have to start all
over and be absolutely unable to get past that. Then I would have to
recognize that I could not remember and give up saying my prayers that
night and try something else. So on some nights I would try to remember
all the animals in the world by name and then the birds and then fishes
and then countries and cities and then kinds of food and the names of
all the streets I could remember in Chicago, and when I could not
remember anything at all any more I would just listen. And I do not
remember a night on which you could not hear things. If I could have a
light I was not afraid to sleep, because I knew my soul would only go
out of me if it were dark. So, of course, many nights I was where I
could have a light and then I slept because I was nearly always tired
and often very sleepy. And I am sure many times too that I slept without
knowing it—but I never slept knowing it, and on this night I listened
to the silk-worms. You can hear silk-worms eating very clearly in the
night and I lay with my eyes open and listened to them.

There was only one other person in the room and he was awake too. I
listened to him being awake, for a long time. He could not lie as
quietly as I could because, perhaps, he had not had as much practice
being awake. We were lying on blankets spread over straw and when he
moved the straw was noisy, but the silk-worms were not frightened by any
noise we made and ate on steadily. There were the noises of night seven
kilometres behind the lines outside but they were different from the
small noises inside the room in the dark. The other man in the room
tried lying quietly. Then he moved again. I moved too, so he would know
I was awake. He had lived ten years in Chicago. They had taken him for a
soldier in nineteen fourteen when he had come back to visit his family,
and they had given him to me for an orderly because he spoke English. I
heard him listening, so I moved again in the blankets.

“Can’t you sleep, Signor Tenente?” he asked.

“No.”

“I can’t sleep, either.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I don’t know. I can’t sleep.”

“You feel all right?”

“Sure. I feel good. I just can’t sleep.”

“You want to talk a while?” I asked.

“Sure. What can you talk about in this damn place.”

“This place is pretty good,” I said.

“Sure,” he said. “It’s all right.”

“Tell me about out in Chicago,” I said.

“Oh,” he said, “I told you all that once.”

“Tell me about how you got married.”

“I told you that.”

“Was the letter you got Monday—from her?”

“Sure. She writes me all the time. She’s making good money with the
place.”

“You’ll have a nice place when you go back.”

“Sure. She runs it fine. She’s making a lot of money.”

“Don’t you think we’ll wake them up, talking?” I asked.

“No. They can’t hear. Anyway, they sleep like pigs. I’m different,” he
said. “I’m nervous.”

“Talk quiet,” I said. “Want a smoke?”

We smoked skilfully in the dark.

“You don’t smoke much, Signor Tenente.”

“No. I’ve just about cut it out.”

“Well,” he said, “it don’t do you any good and I suppose you get so you
don’t miss it. Did you ever hear a blind man won’t smoke because he
can’t see the smoke come out?”

“I don’t believe it.”

“I think it’s all bull, myself,” he said. “I just heard it somewhere.
You know how you hear things.”

We were both quiet and I listened to the silk-worms.

“You hear those damn silk-worms?” he asked. “You can hear them chew.”

“It’s funny,” I said.

“Say, Signor Tenente, is there something really the matter that you
can’t sleep? I never see you sleep. You haven’t slept nights ever since
I been with you.”

“I don’t know, John,” I said. “I got in pretty bad shape along early
last spring and at night it bothers me.”

“Just like I am,” he said. “I shouldn’t have ever got in this war. I’m
too nervous.”

“Maybe it will get better.”

“Say, Signor Tenente, what did you get in this war for, anyway?”

“I don’t know, John. I wanted to, then.”

“Wanted to,” he said. “That’s a hell of a reason.”

“We oughtn’t to talk out loud,” I said.

“They sleep just like pigs,” he said. “They can’t understand the English
language, anyway. They don’t know a damn thing. What are you going to do
when it’s over and we go back to the States?”

“I’ll get a job on a paper.”

“In Chicago?”

“Maybe.”

“Do you ever read what this fellow Brisbane writes? My wife cuts it out
for me and sends it to me.”

“Sure.”

“Did you ever meet him?”

“No, but I’ve seen him.”

“I’d like to meet that fellow. He’s a fine writer. My wife don’t read
English but she takes the paper just like when I was home and she cuts
out the editorials and the sport page and sends them to me.”

“How are your kids?”

“They’re fine. One of the girls is in the fourth grade now. You know,
Signor Tenente, if I didn’t have the kids I wouldn’t be your orderly
now. They’d have made me stay in the line all the time.”

“I’m glad you’ve got them.”

“So am I. They’re fine kids but I want a boy. Three girls and no boy.
That’s a hell of a note.”

“Why don’t you try and go to sleep.”

“No, I can’t sleep now. I’m wide awake now, Signor Tenente. Say, I’m
worried about you not sleeping though.”

“It’ll be all right, John.”

“Imagine a young fellow like you not to sleep.”

“I’ll get all right. It just takes a while.”

“You got to get all right. A man can’t get along that don’t sleep. Do
you worry about anything? You got anything on your mind?”

“No, John, I don’t think so.”

“You ought to get married, Signor Tenente. Then you wouldn’t worry.”

“I don’t know.”

“You ought to get married. Why don’t you pick out some nice Italian girl
with plenty of money. You could get any one you want. You’re young and
you got good decorations and you look nice. You been wounded a couple of
times.”

“I can’t talk the language well enough.”

“You talk it fine. To hell with talking the language. You don’t have to
talk to them. Marry them.”

“I’ll think about it.”

“You know some girls, don’t you?”

“Sure.”

“Well, you marry the one with the most money. Over here, the way they’re
brought up, they’ll all make you a good wife.”

“I’ll think about it.”

“Don’t think about it, Signor Tenente. Do it.”

“All right.”

“A man ought to be married. You’ll never regret it. Every man ought to
be married.”

“All right,” I said. “Let’s try and sleep a while.”

“All right, Signor Tenente. I’ll try it again. But you remember what I
said.”

“I’ll remember it,” I said. “Now let’s sleep a while, John.”

“All right,” he said. “I hope you sleep, Signor Tenente.”

I heard him roll in his blankets on the straw and then he was very quiet
and I listened to him breathing regularly. Then he started to snore. I
listened to him snore for a long time and then I stopped listening to
him snore and listened to the silk-worms eating. They ate steadily,
making a dropping in the leaves. I had a new thing to think about and I
lay in the dark with my eyes open and thought of all the girls I had
ever known and what kind of wives they would make. It was a very
interesting thing to think about and for a while it killed off
trout-fishing and interfered with my prayers. Finally, though, I went
back to trout-fishing, because I found that I could remember all the
streams and there was always something new about them, while the girls,
after I had thought about them a few times, blurred and I could not call
them into my mind and finally they all blurred and all became rather the
same and I gave up thinking about them almost altogether. But I kept on
with my prayers and I prayed very often for John in the nights and his
class was removed from active service before the October offensive. I
was glad he was not there, because he would have been a great worry to
me. He came to the hospital in Milan to see me several months after and
was very disappointed that I had not yet married, and I know he would
feel very badly if he knew that, so far, I have never married. He was
going back to America and he was very certain about marriage and knew it
would fix up everything.

 
 They started two hours before daylight, and at first, it was not
necessary to break the ice across the canal as other boats had gone on
ahead.  In each boat, in the darkness, so you could not see, but only
hear him, the poler stood in the stern, with his long oar.  The shooter
sat on a shooting stool fastened to the top of a box that contained his
lunch and shells, and the shooter's two, or more, guns were propped
against the load of wooden decoys.  Somewhere, in each boat, there was
a sack with one or two live mallard hens, or a hen and a drake, and in
each boat there was a dog who shifted and shivered uneasily at the
sound of the wings of the ducks that passed overhead in the darkness.

Four of the boats went on up the main canal towards the big lagoon to
the north.  A fifth boat had already turned off into a side canal.
Now, the sixth boat turned south into a shallow lagoon, and there was
no broken water.

It was all ice, new-frozen during the sudden, windless cold of the
night.  It was rubbery and bending against the thrust of the boatman's
oar.  Then it would break as sharply as a pane of glass, but the boat
made little forward progress.

'Give me an oar,' the shooter in the sixth boat said.  He stood up and
braced himself carefully.  He could hear the ducks passing in the
darkness, and feel the restless lurching of the dog.  To the north he
heard the sound of breaking ice from the other boats.

'Be careful,' the poler in the stern said.  'Don't tip the boat over.'

'I am a boatman, too,' the shooter said.

He took the long oar the boatman handed him and reversed it so he could
hold it by the blade.  Holding the blade he reached forward and punched
the handle through the ice.  He felt the firm bottom of the shallow
lagoon, put his weight on the top of the wide oar-blade, and holding
with both hands and, first pulling, then shoving, until the pole-hold
was well to the stern, he drove the boat ahead to break the ice.  The
ice broke like sheets of plate glass as the boat drove into it, and
onto it, and astern the boatman shoved them ahead into the broken
passage.

After a while, the shooter, who was working hard and steadily and
sweating in his heavy clothes, asked the boatman, 'Where is the
shooting barrel?'

'Off there to the left.  In the middle of the next bay.'

'Should I turn for it now?'

'As you wish.'

'What do you mean, as I wish?  You know the water.  Is there water to
carry us there?'

'The tide is low.  Who knows?'

'It will be daylight before we get there if we don't hurry.'

The boatman did not answer.

All right, you surly jerk, the shooter thought to himself.  We are
going to get there.  We've made two-thirds of the way now and if you
are worried about having to work to break ice to pick up birds, that is
altogether too bad.

'Get your back in it, jerk,' he said in English.

'What?' the boatman asked in Italian.

'I said let's go.  It's going to be light.'

It was daylight before they reached the oaken-staved hogshead sunk in
the bottom of the lagoon.  It was surrounded by a sloping rim of earth
that had been planted with sedge and grass, and the shooter swung
carefully up onto this, feeling the frozen grasses break as he stepped
on them.  The boatman lifted the combination shooting stool and shell
box out of the boat and handed it to the shooter, who leaned over and
placed it in the bottom of the big barrel.

The shooter, wearing his hip boots and an old combat jacket, with a
patch on the left shoulder that no one understood, and with the slight
light places on the straps, where stars had been removed, climbed down
into the barrel and the boatman handed him his two guns.

He placed them against the wall of the barrel and hung his other shell
bag between them, hanging it on two hooks built into the wall of the
sunken barrel.  Then he leaned the guns against each side of the shell
bag.

'Is there water?' he asked the boatman.

'No water,' the boatman said.

'Can you drink the lagoon water?'

'No.  It is unhealthy.'

The shooter was thirsty from the hard work of breaking the ice and
driving the boat in and he felt his anger rise, and then held it, and
said, 'Can I help you in the boat to break ice to put out the decoys?'

'No,' the boatman said and shoved the boat savagely out on to the thin
sheet ice that cracked and ripped as the boat drove up on to it.  The
boatman commenced smashing at the ice with the blade of his oar and
then started tossing decoys out to the side and behind him.

He's in a beautiful mood, the shooter thought.  He's a big brute, too.
I worked like a horse coming out here.  He just pulled his weight and
that's all.  What the hell is eating him?  This is his trade, isn't it?

He arranged the shooting stool so he would have the maximum swing to
left and right, opened a box of shells, and filled his pockets and
opened another of the boxes of shells in the shell bag so he could
reach into it easily.  In front of him, where the lagoon lay glazed in
the first light, was the black boat and the tall, heavily built boatman
smashing with his oar at the ice and tossing decoys overboard as though
he were ridding himself of something obscene.

It was getting lighter now and the shooter could see the low line of
the near point across the lagoon.  Beyond that point he knew there were
two other shooting posts and far beyond it there was more marsh and
then the open sea.  He loaded both his guns and checked the position of
the boat that was putting out decoys.

From behind him, he heard the incoming whisper of wings and he
crouched, took hold of his right-hand gun with his right hand as he
looked up from under the rim of the barrel, then stood to shoot at the
two ducks that were dropping down, their wings set to brake, coming
down dark to the grey dim sky, slanting towards the decoys.

His head low, he swung the gun on a long slant, down, well and ahead of
the second duck, then without looking at the result of his shot he
raised the gun smoothly, up, up ahead and to the left of the other duck
that was climbing to the left and as he pulled, saw it fold in flight
and drop among the decoys in the broken ice.  He looked to his right
and saw the first duck a black patch on the same ice.  He knew he had
shot carefully on the first duck, far to the right of where the boat
was and on the second, high out and to the left, letting the duck climb
far up and to the left to be sure the boat was out of any line of fire.
It was a lovely double, shot exactly as he should have shot, with
complete consideration and respect for the position of the boat and he
felt very good as he reloaded.

'Listen,' the man in the boat called.  'Don't shoot towards the boat.'

I'll be a sad son of a bitch, the shooter said to himself.  I will
indeed.

'Get your decoys out,' he called to the man in the boat.  'But get them
out fast.  I won't shoot until they are all out.  Except straight
overhead.'

The man in the boat said nothing that could be heard.

I can't figure it, the shooter thought to himself.  He knows the game.
He knows I split the work, or more, coming out.  I never shot a safer
or more careful duck in my life than that.  What's the matter with him?
I offered to put the dekes out with him.  The hell with him.

Out on the right now, the boatman was still chopping angrily at the ice
and tossing out the wooden decoys in a hatred that showed in every move
he made.

Don't let him spoil it, the shooter told himself.  There won't be much
shooting with this ice unless the sun should melt it later on, You
probably will only have a few birds, so don't let him spoil it for you.
You don't know how many more times you will shoot ducks and do not let
anything spoil it for you.

He watched the sky lightening beyond the long point of marsh and
turning in the sunken barrel, he looked out across the frozen lagoon
and the marsh and saw the snow-covered mountains a long way off.  Low
as he was, no foot-hills showed and the mountains rose abruptly from
the plain.  As he looked towards the mountains he could feel a breeze
on his face and he knew, then, the wind would come from there, rising
with the sun and that some birds would surely come flying in from the
sea when the wind disturbed them.

The boatman had finished putting out the decoys.  They were in two
bunches, one straight ahead and to the left towards where the sun would
rise and the other to the shooter's right.  Now he dropped over the hen
mallard with her string and anchor and the calling duck bobbed her head
under water and raising and dipping her head, splashed water on to her
back.

'Don't you think it would be good to break more ice around the edges?'
the shooter called to the boatman.  'There's not much water to attract
them.'

The boatman said nothing but commenced to smash at the jagged perimeter
of ice with his oar.  This ice breaking was unnecessary and the boatman
knew it.  But the shooter did not know it and he thought, I do not
understand him but I must not let him ruin it.  I must keep it entire
and not let him do it.  Every time you shoot now can be the last shoot
and no stupid son of a bitch should be allowed to ruin it.  Keep your
temper, boy, he told himself.




Chapter II

But he was not a boy.  He was fifty and a Colonel of Infantry in the
Army of the United States and to pass a physical examination that he
had to take the day before he came down to Venice for this shoot, he
had taken enough mannitol hexanitrate to, well he did not quite know
what to--to pass, he said to himself.

The surgeon had been quite sceptical.  But he noted the readings after
taking them twice.

'You know, Dick,' he said.  'It isn't indicated; in fact it is
definitely contra-indicated in increased intra-colour and intra-cranial
pressure.'

'I don't know what you are talking about,' the shooter, who was not a
shooter, then, except potentially and was a Colonel of Infantry in the
Army of the United States, reduced from being a general officer, said.

'I have known you a long time, Colonel.  Or maybe it just seems a long
time,' the surgeon told him.

'It's been a long time,' the Colonel said.

'We sound like song writers,' the surgeon said.  'But don't you ever
run into anything, or let any sparks strike you, when you're really
souped up on nitroglycerin.  They ought to make you drag a chain like a
high-octane truck.'

'Wasn't my cardiograph O.K.?' the Colonel asked.

'Your cardiograph was wonderful, Colonel.  It could have been that of a
man of twenty-five.  It might have been that of a boy of nineteen.'

'Then what are you talking about?' the Colonel asked.

That much mannitol hexanitrate produced a certain amount of nausea,
sometimes, and he was anxious for the interview to terminate.  He was
also anxious to lie down and take a seconal.  I ought to write the
manual of minor tactics for the heavy pressure platoon, he thought.
Wish I could tell him that.  Why don't I just throw myself on the mercy
of the court?  You never do, he told himself.  You always plead them
non-guilty.

'How many times have you been hit in the head?' the surgeon asked him.

'You know,' the Colonel told him.  'It's in my 201.'

'How many times have you been hit _on_ the head?'

'Oh Christ.'  Then he said.  'You are asking for the army or as my
physician?'

'As your physician.  You didn't think I'd try to wind your clock, did
you?'

'No, Wes.  I'm sorry.  Just what was it you wanted to know?'

'Concussions.'

'Real ones?'

'Any time you were cold or couldn't remember afterwards.'

'Maybe ten,' the Colonel said.  'Counting polo.  Give or take three.'

'You poor old son of a bitch,' the surgeon said.  'Colonel, sir,' he
added.

'Can I go now?' the Colonel asked.

'Yes, sir,' the surgeon said.  'You're in good shape.'

'Thanks,' the Colonel said.  'Want to go on a duck shoot down in the
marshes at the mouth of the Tagliamento?  Wonderful shoot.  Some nice
Italian kids I met up at Cortina own it.'

'Is that where they shoot coots?'

'No.  They shoot real ducks at this one.  Good kids.  Good shoot.  Real
ducks.  Mallard, pin-tail, widgeon.  Some geese.  Just as good as at
home when we were kids.'

'I was kids in 'twenty-nine and 'thirty.'

'That's the first mean thing I ever heard you say.'

'I didn't mean it like that.  I just meant I didn't remember when duck
shooting was good.  I'm a city boy, too.'

'That's the only God-damn trouble with you, too.  I never saw a city
boy yet that was worth a damn.'

'You don't mean that, do you, Colonel?'

'Of course not.  You know damn well I don't.'

'You're in good shape, Colonel,' the surgeon said.  'I'm sorry I can't
go on the shoot.  I can't even shoot.'

'Hell,' said the Colonel.  'That doesn't make any difference.  Neither
can anybody else in this army.  I'd like to have you around.'

'I'll give you something else to back up what you're using.'

'Is there anything?'

'Not really.  They're working on stuff, though.'

'Let 'em work,' the Colonel said.

'I think that's a laudable attitude, sir.'

'Go to hell,' the Colonel said.  'You sure you don't want to go?'

'I get my ducks at Longchamps on Madison Avenue,' the surgeon said.
'It's air-conditioned in the summer and it's warm in the winter and I
don't have to get up before first light and wear long-horned underwear.'

'All right, City Boy.  You'll never know.'

'I never wanted to know,' the surgeon said.  'You're in good shape,
Colonel, sir.'

'Thanks,' said the Colonel and went out.




Chapter III

That was the day before yesterday.  Yesterday he had driven down from
Trieste to Venice along the old road that ran from Montfalcone to
Latisana and across the flat country.  He had a good driver and he
relaxed completely in the front seat of the car and looked out at all
this country he had known when he was a boy.

It looks quite differently now, he thought.  I suppose it is because
the distances are all changed.  Everything is much smaller when you are
older.  Then, too, the roads are better now and there is no dust.  The
only times I used to ride through it was in a camion.  The rest of the
times we walked.  I suppose what I looked for then, was patches of
shade when we fell out, and wells in farmyards.  And ditches, too, he
thought.  I certainly looked for plenty of ditches.

They made a curve and crossed the Tagliamento on a temporary bridge.
It was green along the banks and men were fishing along the far shore
where it ran deep.  The blown bridge was being repaired with a snarl of
riveting hammers, and eight hundred yards away the smashed buildings
and outbuildings of what was now a ruined country house once built by
Longhena showed where the mediums had dropped their loads.

'Look at it,' the driver said.  'In this country you find a bridge or a
railway station.  Then go half a mile from it in any direction and you
find it like that.'

'I guess the lesson is,' the Colonel said, 'don't ever build yourself a
country house, or a church, or hire Giotto to paint you any frescoes,
if you've got a church, eight hundred yards away from any bridge.'

'I knew there must be a lesson in it, sir,' the driver said.

They were past the ruined villa now and on to the straight road with
the willows growing by the ditches still dark with winter, and the
fields full of mulberry trees.  Ahead a man was pedalling a bicycle and
using both his hands to read a paper.

'If there are heavies the lesson ought to say a mile,' the driver said.
'Would that be about right, sir?'

'If it's guided missiles,' the Colonel said.  'Better make it two
hundred and fifty miles.  Better give that cyclist some horn.'

The driver did, and the man moved over to the side of the road without
either looking up or touching his handlebars.  As they passed him, the
Colonel tried to see what paper he was reading, but it was folded over.

'I guess a man would do better now not to build himself a fine house or
a church, or to get who did you say it was to paint frescoes?'

'Giotto, I said.  But it could be Piero della Francesca or Mantegna.
Could be Michelangelo.'

'Do you know a lot about painters, sir?' the driver asked.

They were on a straight stretch of road now and were making time so
that one farm blended, almost blurred, into another farm and you could
only see what was far ahead and moving towards you.  Lateral vision was
just a condensation of flat, low country in the winter.  I'm not sure I
like speed, the Colonel thought.  Brueghel would have been in a hell of
a shape if he had to look at the country like this.

'Painters?' he answered the driver.  'I know quite a little about them,
Burnham.'

'I'm Jackson, sir.  Burnham's up at the rest centre at Cortina.  That's
a fine place, sir.'

'I'm getting stupid,' the Colonel said.  'Excuse me, Jackson.  It is a
fine place.  Good chow.  Well run.  Nobody bothers you.'

'Yes, sir,' Jackson agreed.  'Now the reason I asked you about
painters, is these madonnas.  I thought I ought to see some painting so
I went to that big place in Florence.'

'The Uffizi?  The Pitti?'

'Whatever they call it.  The biggest one.  And I kept looking at those
paintings until madonnas started to run out of my ears.  I tell you,
Colonel, sir, a man who hasn't been checked out on this painting can
only see just about so many madonnas and it gets him.  You know my
theory?  You know how crazy they are about bambinis and the less they
got to eat the more bambinis they got and that they have coming?  Well,
I think these painters were probably big bambini lovers like all
Italians.  I don't know these ones you mentioned just now, so I don't
include them in my theory and you'll put me straight anyway.  But it
looks to me like these madonnas, that I really saw plenty of, sir, it
looks to me like these just straight ordinary madonna painters were
sort of a manifest, say, of this whole bambini business, if you
understand what I mean.'

'Plus the fact that they were restricted to religious subjects.'

'Yes, sir.  Then you think there is something to my theory?'

'Sure.  I think it is a little more complicated, though.'

'Naturally, sir.  It's just my preliminary theory.'

'Do you have any other theories on art, Jackson?'

'No, sir.  That bambini theory is as far as I've thought it through.
What I wish is, though, they would paint some good pictures of that
high country up around the rest centre at Cortina.'

'Titian came from up there,' the Colonel said.  'At least they say he
did.  I went down the valley and saw the house where he was supposed to
be born.'

'Was it much of a place, sir?'

'Not so much.'

'Well, if he painted any pictures of that country up around there, with
those sunset colour rocks and the pines and the snow and all the
pointed steeples----'

'_Campaniles_,' the Colonel said.  'Like that one ahead at Ceggia.  It
means bell tower.'

'Well, if he painted any really good pictures of that country I'd sure
as hell like to trade him out of some of them.'

'He painted some wonderful women,' the Colonel said.

'If I had a joint or a roadhouse or some sort of an inn, say, I could
use one of those,' the driver said.  'But if I brought home a picture
of some woman, my old woman would run me from Rawlins to Buffalo.  I'd
be lucky if I _got_ to Buffalo.'

'You could give it to the local museum.'

'All they got in the local museum is arrow heads, war bonnets, scalping
knives, different scalps, petrified fish, pipes of peace, photographs
of Liver Eating Johnston, and the skin of some bad man that they hanged
him and some doctor skinned him out.  One of those women pictures would
be out of place there.'

'See that next _campanile_ down there across the plain?' the Colonel
said.  'I'll show you a place down there where we used to fight when I
was a kid.'

'Did you fight here, too, sir?'

'Yeah,' the Colonel said.

'Who had Trieste in that war?'

'The Krauts.  The Austrians, I mean.'

'Did we ever get it?'

'Not till the end when it was over.'

'Who had Florence and Rome?'

'We did.'

'Well, I guess you weren't so damned bad off then.'

'Sir,' the Colonel said gently.

'I'm sorry, sir,' the driver said quickly.  'I was in the Thirty-Sixth
Division, sir.'

'I've seen the patch.'

'I was thinking about the Rapido, sir, I didn't mean to be insolent or
lacking in respect.'

'You weren't,' the Colonel said.  'You were just thinking about the
Rapido.  Listen, Jackson, everybody who's soldiered a long time has had
their Rapidos and more than one.'

'I couldn't take more than one, sir.'

The car went through the cheerful town of San Dona di Piave.  It was
built up and new, but no more ugly than a middle western town, and it
was as prosperous and as cheery as Fossalta, just up the river, is
miserable and gloomy, the Colonel thought.  Did Fossalta never get over
the first war?  I never saw it before it was smacked, he thought.  They
shelled it badly before the big fifteenth of June offensive in
'eighteen.  Then we shelled it really badly before we re-took it.  He
remembered how the attack had taken off from Monastier, gone through
Fornace, and on this winter day he remembered how it had been that
summer.

A few weeks ago he had gone through Fossalta and had gone out along the
sunken road to find the place where he had been hit, out on the river
bank.  It was easy to find because of the bend of the river, and where
the heavy machine gun post had been the crater was smoothly grassed.
It had been cropped, by sheep or goats, until it looked like a designed
depression in a golf course.  The river was slow and a muddy blue here,
with reeds along the edges, and the Colonel, no one being in sight,
squatted low, and looking across the river from the bank where you
could never show your head in daylight, relieved himself in the exact
place where he had determined, by triangulation, that he had been badly
wounded thirty years before.

'A poor effort,' he said aloud to the river and the river bank that
were heavy with autumn quiet and wet from the fall rains.  'But my own.

He stood up and looked around.  There was no one in sight and he had
left the car down the sunken road in front of the last and saddest
rebuilt house in Fossalta.

'Now I'll complete the monument,' he said to no one but the dead, and
he took an old Solingen clasp knife, such as German poachers carry,
from his pocket.  It locked on opening and, twirling it, he dug a neat
hole in the moist earth.  He cleaned the knife on his right combat boot
and then inserted a brown ten thousand lira note in the hole and tamped
it down and put the grass that he had cored out over it.

'That is twenty years at five hundred lira a year for the Medaglia
d'Argento al Valore Militare.  The V.C. carries ten guineas, I believe.
The D.S.C. is non-productive.  The Silver Star is free.  I'll keep the
change,' he said.

It's fine now, he thought.  It has merde, money, blood; look how that
grass grows; and the iron's in the earth along with Gino's leg, both of
Randolfo's legs and my right knee-cap.  It's a wonderful monument.  It
has everything.  Fertility, money, blood and iron.  Sounds like a
nation.  Where fertility, money, blood and iron is; there is the
fatherland.  We need coal though.  We ought to get some coal.

Then he looked across the river to the rebuilt white house that had
once been rubble, and he spat in the river.  It was a long spit and he
just made it.

'I couldn't spit that night nor afterwards for a long time,' he said.
'But I spit good now for a man who doesn't chew.'

He walked slowly back to where the car was parked.  The driver was
asleep.

'Wake up, son,' he had said.  'Turn her around and take that road
towards Treviso.  We don't need a map on this part.  I'll give you the
turns.'




Chapter IV

Now, on his way into Venice, keeping strictly controlled and unthinking
his great need to be there, the big Buick cleared the last of San Dona
and came up on to the bridge over the Piave.

They crossed the bridge and were on the Italian side of the river and
he saw the old sunken road again.  It was as smooth and undistinguished
now, as it was all along the river.  But he could see the old
positions.  And now, along each side of the straight, flat,
canal-bordered road they were making time on were the willows of the
two canals that had contained the dead.  There had been a great killing
at the last of the offensive and someone, to clear the river bank
positions and the road in the hot weather, had ordered the dead thrown
into the canals.  Unfortunately, the canal gates were still in the
Austrians' hands down the river, and they were closed.

So there was little movement to the water, and the dead had stayed,
there a long time, floating and bloating face up and face down
regardless of nationality until they had attained colossal proportions.
Finally, after organization had been established, labour troops hauled
them out at night and buried them close to the road.  The Colonel
looked for added greenness close to the road but could not note any.
However, there were many ducks and geese in the canals, and men were
fishing in them all along the road.

They dug them all up anyway, the Colonel thought, and buried them in
that big _ossario_ up by Nervesa.

'We fought along here when I was a kid,' the Colonel told the driver.

'It's a God-damn flat country to fight in,' the driver said.  'Did you
hold that river?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'We held it and lost it and took it back
again.'

'There isn't a contour here as far as you can see.'

'That was the trouble,' the Colonel said.  'You had to use contours you
couldn't see, they were so small, and ditches and houses and canal
banks and hedgerows.  It was like Normandy only flatter.  I think it
must have been something like fighting in Holland.'

'That river sure doesn't look anything like the Rapido.'

'It was a pretty good old river,' the Colonel said.  'Up above, it had
plenty of water then, before all these hydro-electric projects.  And it
had very deep and tricky channels in the pebbles and shingle when it
was shallow.'

He knew how boring any man's war is to any other man, and he stopped
talking about it.  They always take it personally, he thought.  No one
is interested in it, abstractly, except soldiers and there are not many
soldiers.  You make them and the good ones are killed, and above they
are always bucking for something so hard they never look or listen.
They are always thinking of what they have seen and while you are
talking they are thinking of what they will say and what it may lead to
in their advancement or their privilege.  There was no sense boring
this boy, who, for all his combat infantryman badge, his Purple Heart
and the other things he wore, was in no sense a soldier but only a man
placed, against his will, in uniform, who had elected to remain in the
army for his own ends.

'What did you do in civil life, Jackson?' he asked.

'I was partners with my brother in a garage in Rawlins, Wyoming, sir.

'Are you going back there?'

'My brother got killed in the Pacific and the guy who was running the
garage was no good,' the driver said.  'We lost what we had put in it.'

'That's bad,' the Colonel said.

'You're God-damned right it's bad,' the driver said and added, 'sir'.

The Colonel looked up the road.

He knew that if they kept on this road they would come, shortly, to the
turn that he was waiting for; but he was impatient.

'Keep your eyes open and take a left hand turn on the road leading off
this pike,' he told the driver.

'Do you think those low roads will be good with this big car, sir?'

'We'll see,' the Colonel said.  'Hell, man, it hasn't rained in three
weeks.'

'I don't trust those side roads in this low country.'

'If we get stuck, I'll haul you out with oxen.'

'I was only thinking about the car, sir.'

'Well, think about what I told you and turn off on the first left side
road you see if it looks practicable.'

'That looks like one coming up, from the hedges,' the driver said.

'You're all clear behind.  Pull up just ahead of it and I'll go over
and have a look.'

He stepped out of the car and walked across the wide, hard-surfaced
road and looked at the narrow dirt road, with the swift flowing canal
beside it, and the thick hedge beyond.  Beyond the hedge, he saw a low
red farmhouse with a big barn.  The road was dry.  There were not even
cart ruts sunk in it.  He got back into the car.

'It's a boulevard,' he said.  'Quit worrying.'

'Yes, sir.  It's your car, sir.'

'I know,' the Colonel said.  'I'm still paying for it.  Say, Jackson,
do you always suffer so much any time you go off a highway on to a
secondary road?'

'No, sir.  But there's a lot of difference between a jeep, and a car as
low hung as this.  Do you know the clearance you have on your
differential and your body frame on this?'

'I've got a shovel in the truck and we've got chains.  Wait till you
see where we're going after we leave Venice.'

'Do we go all the way in this car?'

'I don't know.  I'll see.'

'Think about your fenders, sir.'

'We'll cut the fenders off like the Indians do in Oklahoma.  She's
over-fendered right now.  She's got too much of everything except
engine.  Jackson, that's a real engine she's got.'

'It certainly is, sir.  It's a great pleasure to drive that big engine
on the good roads.  That's why I don't want anything to happen to her.'

'That's very good of you, Jackson.  Now just quit suffering.'

'I'm not suffering, sir.'

'Good,' said the Colonel.

He was not, either, because just then he saw, beyond the line of
close-bunched brown trees ahead, a sail moving along.  It was a big red
sail, raked sharply down from the peak, and it moved slowly behind the
trees.

Why should it always move your heart to see a sail moving along through
the country, the Colonel thought.  Why does it move my heart to see the
great, slow, pale oxen?  It must be the gait as well as the look of
them and the size and the colour.

But a good fine big mule, or a string of pack mules in good condition,
moves me, too.  So does a coyote every time I ever see one, and a wolf,
gaited like no other animal, grey and sure of himself, carrying that
heavy head and with the hostile eyes.

'Ever see any wolves out around Rawlins, Jackson?'

'No, sir.  Wolves were gone before my time; they poisoned them out.
Plenty coyotes, though.'

'Do you like coyotes?'

'I like to hear them nights.'

'So do I.  Better than anything, except seeing a ship sailing along
through the country.'

'There's a boat doing that over there, sir.'

'On the Sile canal,' the Colonel told him.  'She's a sailing barge
going to Venice.  This wind is off the mountains now and she makes it
along pretty good.  It's liable to turn really cold to-night if this
wind holds and it ought to bring in plenty ducks.  Turn to your left
here and we'll run along the canal.  There's a good road.'

'They didn't have much duck shooting where I came from.  But there was
plenty of it in Nebraska along the Platte.'

'Do you want to shoot where we're going?'

'I don't believe so, sir.  I'm not much of a shot, and I'd rather stay
in that sack.  It's a Sunday morning, you know.'

'I know,' the Colonel said.  'You can stay in the sack until noon if
you want.'

'I brought my repellent.  I ought to sleep O.K.'

'I'm not sure you'll need it,' the Colonel said.  'Did you bring any
K-rations or Ten in One?  They're liable to eat Italian food, you know.'

'I brought a few cans to help out and a little stuff to give away.'

'That's good,' the Colonel said.

He was looking ahead now to see where the canal road joined the main
highway again.  There he knew that he would see it on a clear day such
as this was.  Across the marshes, brown as those at the mouths of the
Mississippi around Pilot Town are in winter, and with their reeds bent
by the heavy north wind, he saw the squared tower of the church at
Torcello and the high _campanile_ of Burano beyond it.  The sea was a
slate blue and he could see the sails of twelve sailing barges running
with the wind for Venice.

I'll have to wait until we cross the Dese River above Noghera to see it
perfectly, he thought.  It is strange to remember how we fought back
there along the canal that winter to defend it and we never saw it.
Then one time, I was back as far as Noghera and it was clear and cold
like to-day, and I saw it across the water.  But I never got into it.
It is my city, though, because I fought for it when I was a boy, and
now that I am half a hundred years old, they know I fought for it and
am a part owner and they treat me well.

Do you think that's why they treat you well, he asked himself.

Maybe, he thought.  Maybe they treat me well because I'm a chicken
colonel on the winning side.  I don't believe it, though.  I hope not,
anyway.  It is not France, he thought.

There you fight your way into a city that you love and are very careful
about breaking anything and then, if you have good sense, you are
careful not to go back because you will meet some military characters
who will resent your having fought your way in.  _Vive la France et les
pommes de terre frites.  Liberté, Venalité, et Stupidité_.  The great
_clarte_ of the French military thinking.  They haven't had a military
thinker since du Picq.  He was a poor bloody Colonel, too.  _Mangin_,
_Maginot_ and _Gamelin_.  Take your choice, Gentlemen.  Three schools
of thought.  One; I hit them on the nose.  Two; I hide behind this
thing which does not cover my left flank.  Three; I hide my head in the
sand like an ostrich, confident in the greatness of France as a
military power and then take off.

Take off is putting it very cleanly and pleasantly.  Sure, he thought,
whenever you over-simplify you become unjust.  Remember all the fine
ones in the Resistance, remember Foch both fought and organized and
remember how fine the people were.  Remember your good friends and
remember your deads.  Remember plenty things and your best friends
again and the finest people that you know.  Don't be a bitter nor a
stupid.  And what has that to do with soldiering as a trade?  Cut it
out, he told himself.  You're on a trip to have fun.

'Jackson,' he said, 'are you happy?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Good.  Shortly, we are coming to a view that I want you to see.  You
only have to take one look at it.  The entire operation will be
practically painless.'

I wonder what he's riding me for now, the driver thought.  Just because
he was a B.G. once he knows everything.  If he was any good as a B.G.
why didn't he hold it?  He's been beat up so much he's slug-nutty.

'There's the view, Jackson,' the Colonel said.  'Stop her by the side
of the road and we'll take a look.'

The Colonel and the driver walked over to the Venice side of the road
and looked across the lagoon that was whipped by the strong, cold wind
from the mountains that sharpened all the outlines of buildings so that
they were geometrically clear.

'That's Torcello directly opposite us,' the Colonel pointed.  'That
where the people lived that were driven off the mainland by the
Visigoths.  They built that church you see there with the square tower.
There were thirty thousand people lived there once and they built that
church to honour their Lord and to worship him.  Then, after they built
it, the mouth of the Sile River silted up or a big flood changed it,
and all that land we came through just now got flooded and started to
breed mosquitoes and malaria hit them.  They all started to die, so the
elders got together and decided they should pull out to a healthy place
that would be defensible with boats, and where the Visigoths and the
Lombards and the other bandits couldn't get at them, because these
bandits had no sea-power.  The Torcello boys were all great boatmen.
So they took the stones of all their houses in barges, like that one we
just saw, and they built Venice.'

He stopped.  'Am I boring you, Jackson?'

'No, sir.  I had no idea who pioneered Venice.'

'It was the boys from Torcello.  They were very tough and they had very
good taste in building.  They came from a little place up the coast
called Caorle.  But they drew on all the people from the towns and the
farms behind when the Visigoths overran them.  It was a Torcello boy
who was running arms into Alexandria, who located the body of St. Mark
and smuggled it out under a load of fresh pork so the infidel customs
guards wouldn't check him.  This boy brought the remains of St. Mark to
Venice, and he's their patron saint and they have a cathedral there to
him.  But by that time, they were trading so far to the east that the
architecture is pretty Byzantine for my taste.  They never built any
better than at the start there in Torcello.  That's Torcello there.'

It was, indeed.

'St Mark's square is where the pigeons are and where they have that big
cathedral that looks sort of like a moving picture palace, isn't it?'

'Right, Jackson.  You're on the ball.  If that's the way you look at
it.  Now you look beyond Torcello you will see the lovely campanile on
Burano that has damn near as much list on it as the leaning tower of
Pisa.  That Burano is a very over-populated little island where the
women make wonderful lace, and the men make bambinis and work day-times
in the glass factories in that next island you see on beyond with the
other campanile, which is Murano.  They make wonderful glass day-times
for the rich of all the world, and then they come home on the little
vaporetto and make bambinis.  Not everyone passes every night with his
wife though.  They hunt ducks nights too, with big punt guns, out along
the edge of the marshes on this lagoon you're looking across now.  All
night long on a moonlight night you hear the shots.'  He paused.

'Now when you look past Murano you see Venice.  That's my town.
There's plenty more I could show you, but I think we probably ought to
roll now.  But take one good look at it.  This is where you can see how
it all happened.  But nobody ever looks at it from here.'

'It's a beautiful view.  Thank you, sir.'

'O.K.,' the Colonel said.  'Let's roll.'




Chapter V

But he continued to look and it was all as wonderful to him and it
moved him as it had when he was eighteen years old and had seen it
first, understanding nothing of it and only knowing that it was
beautiful.  The winter had come very cold that year and all the
mountains were white beyond the plain.  It was necessary for the
Austrians to try to break through at the angle where the Sile River and
the old bed of the Piave were the only lines of defence.

If you had the old bed of the Piave then you had the Sile to fall back
on if the first line did not hold.  Beyond the Sile there was nothing
but bare-assed plain and a good road network into the Veneto plain and
the plains of Lombardy, and the Austrians attacked again and again and
again late through the winter, to try to get on to this fine road that
they were rolling on now which led straight to Venice.  That winter the
Colonel, who was a lieutenant then, and in a foreign army, which had
always made him slightly suspect afterwards in his own army, and had
done his career no good, had a sore throat all winter.  This sore
throat was from being in the water so much.  You could not get dry and
it was better to get wet quickly and stay wet.

The Austrian attacks were ill co-ordinated, but they were constant and
exasperated and you first had the heavy bombardment which was supposed
to put you out of business, and then, when it lifted, you checked your
positions and counted the people.  But you had no time to care for
wounded, since you knew that the attack was coming immediately, and
then you killed the men who came wading across the marshes, holding
their rifles above the water and coming as slow as men wade, waist deep.

If they did not lift the shelling when it started, the Colonel, then a
lieutenant, often thought, I do not know what we would be able to do.
But they always lifted it and moved it back ahead of the attack.

If we had lost the old Piave and were on the Sile they would move it
back to the second and third lines; although such lines were quite
untenable, and they should have brought all their guns up very close
and whammed it in all the time they attacked and until they breached
us.  But thank God, some high fool always controls it, the Colonel
thought, and they did it piecemeal.

All that winter, with a bad sore throat, he had killed men who came,
wearing the stick bombs hooked up on a harness under their shoulders
with the heavy, calf-hide packs and the bucket helmets.  They were the
enemy.

But he never hated them; nor could have any feeling about them.  He
commanded with an old sock around his throat, which had been dipped in
turpentine, and they broke down the attacks with rifle fire and with
the machine guns which still existed, or were usable, after the
bombardment.  He taught his people to shoot, really, which is a rare
ability in continental troops, and to be able to look at the enemy when
they came, and, because there was always a dead moment when the
shooting was free, they became very good at it.

But you always had to count and count fast after the bombardment to
know how many shooters you would have.  He was hit three times that
winter, but they were all gift wounds; small wounds in the flesh of the
body without breaking bone, and he had become quite confident of his
personal immortality since he knew he should have been killed in the
heavy artillery bombardment that always preceded the attacks.  Finally,
he did get hit properly and for good.  No one of his other wounds had
ever done to him what the first big one did.  I suppose it is just the
loss of the immortality, he thought.  Well, in a way, that is quite a
lot to lose.

This country meant very much to him, more than he could, or would ever
tell anyone and now he sat in the car happy that in another half hour
they would be in Venice.  He took two mannitol hexanitrate tablets;
since he had always been able to spit since 1918, he could take them
dry, and asked:

'How are you doing, Jackson?'

'Fine, sir.'

'Take the left outside road when we hit the fork for Mestre and we'll
be able to see the boats along the canal and miss that main traffic.'

'Yes, sir,' the driver said.  'Will you check me on the fork?'

'Of course,' the Colonel said.

They were coming up on Mestre fast, and already it was like going to
New York the first time you were ever there in the old days when it was
shining, white and beautiful.  I stole that, he thought.  But that was
before the smoke.  We are coming into my town, he thought.  Christ,
what a lovely town.

They made the left turn and came along the canal where the fishing
boats tied up, and the Colonel looked at them and his heart was happy
because of the brown nets and the wicker fish traps and the clean,
beautiful lines of the boats.  It's not that they are picturesque.  The
hell with picturesque.  They are just damned beautiful.

They passed the long line of boats in the slow canal that carried water
from the Brenta, and he thought about the long stretch of the Brenta
where the great villas were, with their lawns and their gardens and the
plane trees and the cypresses.  I'd like to be buried out there, he
thought.  I know the place very well.  I don't believe you could fix
it, though.  I don't know.  I know some people that might let me be
buried on their place.  I'll ask Alberto.  He might think it was
morbid, though.

For a long time he had been thinking about all the fine places he would
like to be buried and what parts of the earth he would like to be a
part of.  The stinking, putrefying part doesn't last very long, really,
he thought, and anyway you are just a sort of mulch, and even the bones
will be some use finally.  I'd like to be buried way out at the edge of
the grounds, but in sight of the old graceful house and the tall, great
trees.  I don't think it would be much of a nuisance to them.  I could
be a part of the ground where the children play in the evenings, and in
the mornings, maybe, they would still be training jumping horses and
their hoofs would make the thudding on the turf, and trout would rise
in the pool when there was a hatch of fly.

They were up on the causeway from Mestre to Venice now with the ugly
Breda works that might have been Hammond, Indiana.

'What do they make there, sir?' Jackson asked.

'The company makes locomotives in Milan,' the Colonel said.  'Here they
make a little of everything in the metallurgic line.'

It was a miserable view of Venice now and he always disliked this
causeway except that you made such good time and you could see the
buoys and the channels.

'This town makes a living on its own,' he said to Jackson.  'She used
to be the queen of the seas and the people are very tough and they give
less of a good God-damn about things than almost anybody you'll ever
meet.  It's a tougher town than Cheyenne when you really know it, and
everybody is very polite.'

'I wouldn't say Cheyenne was a tough town, sir.'

'Well, it's a tougher town than Casper.'

'Do you think that's a tough town, sir?'

'It's an oil town.  It's a nice town.'

'But I don't think it's tough, sir.  Or ever was.'

'O.K., Jackson.  Maybe we move in different circles.  Or maybe we have
a differing definition for the word.  But this town of Venice, with
everybody being polite and having good manners, is as tough as Cooke
City, Montana, on the day they have the Old Timers' Fish Fry.'

'My idea of a tough town is Memphis.'

'Not like Chicago, Jackson.  Memphis is only tough if you are a Negro.
Chicago is tough North, South, there isn't any East and West.  But
nobody has any manners.  But in this country, if you ever want to know
a _really_ tough town where they eat wonderfully, too, go to Bologna.'

'I never was there.'

'Well, there's the Fiat garage where we leave the car,' the Colonel
said.  'You can leave the key at the office.  They don't steal.  I'll
go in the bar while you park upstairs.  They have people that will
bring the bags.'

'Is it O.K. to leave your gun and shooting gear in the trunk, sir?'

'Sure.  They don't steal here.  I told you that once.'

'I wanted to take the necessary precautions, sir, on your valuable
property.'

'You're so damned noble that sometimes you stink,' the Colonel said.
'Get the wax out of your ears and hear what I say the first time.'

'I heard you, sir,' Jackson said.  The Colonel looked at him
contemplatively and with the old deadliness.

He sure is a mean son of a bitch, Jackson thought, and he can be so
God-damn nice.

'Get my and your bag out and park her up there and check your oil, your
water and your tyres,' the Colonel said, and walked across the oil and
rubber stained cement of the entry of the bar.




Chapter VI

In the bar, sitting at the first table as he came in, there was a
post-war rich from Milan, fat and hard as only Milanese can be, sitting
with his expensive looking and extremely desirable mistress.  They were
drinking negronis, a combination of two sweet vermouths and seltzer
water, and the Colonel wondered how much taxes the man had escaped to
buy that sleek girl in her long mink coat and the convertible he had
seen the chauffeur take up the long, winding ramp to lock away.  The
pair stared at him with the bad manners of their kind and he saluted,
lightly and said to them in Italian, 'I am sorry that I am in uniform.
But it is a uniform.  Not a costume.'

Then he turned his back on them, without waiting to see the effect of
his remark, and walked to the bar.  From the bar you could watch your
luggage, just as well as the two _pescecani_ were watching theirs.

He is probably a Commendatore, he thought.  She is a beautiful, hard
piece of work.  She is damned beautiful, actually.  I wonder what it
would have been like if I had ever had the money to buy me that kind
and put them into the mink?  I'll settle for what I have, he thought,
and they can go and hang themselves.

The bar-tender shook hands with him.  This bar-tender was an Anarchist
but he did not mind the Colonel being a Colonel at all.  He was
delighted by it and proud and loving about it as though the Anarchists
had a Colonel, too, and in some ways, in the several months that they
had known each other, he seemed to feel that he had invented, or at
least erected, the Colonel as you might be happy about participating in
the erection of a _campanile_, or even the old church at Torcello.

The bar-tender had heard the conversation, or, rather, the flat
statement at the table and he was very happy.

He had already sent down, via the dumb-waiter, for a Gordon's gin and
Campari and he said, 'It is coming up in that hand-pulled device.  How
does everything go at Trieste?'

'About as you would imagine.'

'I couldn't even imagine.'

'Then don't strain,' the Colonel said, 'and you will never get piles.'

'I wouldn't mind it if I was a Colonel.'

'I never mind it.'

'You'd be overrun like a dose of salts,' the waiter said.

'Don't tell the Honorable Pacciardi,' the Colonel said.

He and the bar-tender had a joke about this because the Honourable
Pacciardi was Minister of Defence in the Italian Republic.  He was the
same age as the Colonel and had fought very well in the first world
war, and had also fought in Spain as a battalion commander where the
Colonel had known him when he, himself, was an observer.  The
seriousness with which the Honourable Pacciardi took the post of
Minister of Defence of an indefensible country was a bond between the
Colonel and the bar-tender.  The two of them were quite practical men
and the vision of the Honourable Pacciardi defending the Italian
Republic stimulated their minds.

'It's sort of funny up there,' the Colonel said, 'and I don't mind it.'

'We must mechanize the Honourable Pacciardi,' the bar-tender said.
'And supply him with the atomic bomb.'

'I've got three of them in the back of the car,' the Colonel said.
'The new model, complete with handles.  But we can't leave him unarmed.
We must supply him with botulism and anthrax.'

'We cannot fail the Honourable Pacciardi,' the bar-tender said.
'Better to live one day as a lion than a hundred years as a sheep.'

'Better to die on our feet than to live on our knees,' the Colonel
said.  'Though you better get on your belly damn fast if you want to
stay alive in plenty places.'

'Colonel, do not say anything subversive.'

'We will strangle them with our bare hands,' the Colonel said.  'A
million men will spring to arms overnight.'

'Whose arms?' the bar-tender asked.

'All that will be attended to,' the Colonel said.  'It's only a phase
in the Big Picture.'

Just then the driver came in the door.  The Colonel saw that while they
had been joking, he had not watched the door and he was annoyed,
always, with any lapse of vigilance or of security.

'What the hell's been keeping you, Jackson?  Have a drink.'

'No, thank you, sir.'

You prissy jerk, the Colonel thought.  But I better stop riding him; he
corrected.

'We'll be going in a minute,' the Colonel said.  'I've been trying to
learn Italian from my friend here.'  He turned to look at the Milan
profiteers; but they were gone.

I'm getting awfully slow, he thought.  Somebody will take me any day
now.  Maybe even the Honourable Pacciardi, he thought.

'How much do I owe you?' he asked the bar-tender shortly.

The bar-tender told him and looked at him with his wise Italian eyes,
not merry now, although the lines of merriment were clearly cut where
they radiated from the corners of each eye.  I hope there is nothing
wrong with him, the bar-tender thought.  I hope to God, or anything
else, there's nothing really bad.

'Good-bye, my Colonel,' he said.

'_Ciao_,' the Colonel said.  'Jackson, we are going down the long ramp
and due north from the exit to where the small launches are moored.
The varnished ones.  There is a porter with the two bags.  It is
necessary to let them carry them since they have a concession.'

'Yes, sir,' said Jackson.

The two of them went out the door and no one looked back at anyone.

At the _imbarcadero_, the Colonel tipped the man who had carried their
two bags and then looked around for a boatman he knew.

He did not recognize the man in the launch that was first on call, but
the boatman said, 'Good day, my Colonel.  I'm the first.'

'How much is it to the Gritti?'

'You know as well as I, my Colonel.  We do not bargain.  We have a
fixed tariff.'

'What's the tariff?'

'Three thousand five hundred.'

'We could go on the vaporetto for sixty.'

'And nothing prevents you going,' the boatman, who was an elderly man
with a red but un-choleric face, said.  'They won't take you to the
Gritti but they will stop at the _imbarcadero_ past Harry's, and you
can telephone for someone from the Gritti to get your bags.'

And what would I buy with the God-damn three thousand five hundred
lire; and this is a good old man.

'Do you want me to send that man there?' he pointed to a destroyed old
man who did odd jobs and ran errands around the docks, always ready
with the un-needed aid to the elbow of the ascending or descending
passenger, always ready to help when no help was needed, his old felt
hat held out as he bowed after the unneeded act.  'He'll take you to
the vaporetto.  There's one in twenty minutes.'

'The hell with it,' the Colonel said.  'Take us to the Gritti.'

'_Con piacere_,' the boatman said.

The Colonel and Jackson lowered themselves into the launch which looked
like a speed boat.  It was radiantly varnished and lovingly kept and
was powered with a marine conversion of a tiny Fiat engine that had
served its allotted time in the car of a provincial doctor and had been
purchased out of one of the graveyards of automobiles; those mechanical
elephant cemeteries that are the one certain thing you may find in our
world near any populated centre; and been re-conditioned and
re-converted to start this new life on the canals of this city.

'How is the motor doing?' the Colonel asked.  He could hear her
sounding like a stricken tank or T.D., except the noises were in
miniature from the lack of power.

'So-so,' the boatman said.  He moved his free hand in a parallel motion.

'You ought to get the smallest model Universal puts out.  That's the
best and lightest small marine engine I know.'

'Yes,' the boatman said.  'There are quite a few things I should get.'

'Maybe you'll have a good year.'

'It's always possible.  Lots of _pescecani_ come down from Milano to
gamble at the Lido.  But nobody would ride twice in this thing on
purpose.  As a boat, it is fine, too.  It is a well built, pleasant
boat.  Not beautiful as a gondola is, of course.  But it needs an
engine.'

'I might get you a jeep engine.  One that was condemned and you could
work it over.'

'Don't talk about such things,' the boatman said.  'Things like that
don't happen.  I don't want to think about it.'

'You can think about it,' the Colonel said.  'I'm talking true.'

'You mean it.'

'Sure.  I don't guarantee anything.  I'll see what I can do.  How many
children have you got?'

'Six.  Two male and four female.'

'Hell, you mustn't have believed in the Regime.  Only six.'

'I _didn't_ believe in the Regime.'

'You don't have to give me that stuff,' the Colonel said.  'It would
have been quite natural for you to _have_ believed in it.  Do you think
I hold that against a man after we've won?'

They were through the dull part of the canal that runs from Piazzale
Roma to Ca'Foscari, though none of it is dull, the Colonel thought.

It doesn't all have to be palaces nor churches.  Certainly that isn't
dull.  He looked to the right, the starboard, he thought.  I'm on the
water.  It was a long low pleasant building and there was a trattoria
next to it.

I ought to live here.  On retirement pay I could make it all right.  No
Gritti Palace.  A room in a house like that and the tides and the boats
going by.  I could read in the mornings and walk around town before
lunch and go every day to see the Tintorettos at the Accademia and to
the Sculoa San Rocco and eat in good cheap joints behind the market or,
maybe, the woman that ran the house would cook in the evenings.

I think it would be better to have lunch out and get some exercise
walking.  It's a good town to walk in.  I guess the best, probably.  I
never walked in it that it wasn't fun.  I could learn it really well,
he thought, and then I'd have that.

It's a strange, tricky town and to walk from any part to any other
given part of it is better than working crossword puzzles.  It's one of
the few things to our credit that we never smacked it, and to their
credit that they respected it.

Christ, I love it, he said, and I'm so happy I helped defend it when I
was a punk kid, and with an insufficient command of the language and I
never even saw her until that clear day in the winter when I went back
to have that small wound dressed, and saw her rising from the sea.
Merde, he thought, we did very well that winter up at the junction.

I wish I could fight it again, he thought.  Knowing what I know now and
having what we have now.  But they'd have it too and the essential
problem is just the same, except who holds the air.

And all this time he had been watching the bow of the beat-up
beautifully varnished, delicately brass-striped boat, with the brass
all beautifully polished, cut the brown water and seen the small
traffic problems.

They went under the white bridge and under the unfinished wood bridge.
Then they left the red bridge on the right and passed under the first
high-flying white bridge.  Then there was the black iron fret-work
bridge on the canal leading into the Rio Nuovo and they passed the two
stakes chained together but not touching: like us the Colonel thought.
He watched the tide pull at them and he saw how the chains had worn the
wood since he first had seen them.  That's us, he thought.  That's our
monument.  And how many monuments are there to us in the canals of this
town?

Then they still went slowly until the great lantern that was on the
right of the entrance to the Grand Canal where the engine commenced its
metallic agony that produced a slight increase in speed.

Now they came down and under the Accademia between the pilings where
they passed, at touching distance, a heavily loaded black, diesel boat
full of cut timber, cut to chunks, to burn for firewood in the damp
houses of the Sea City.

'That's beech, isn't it?' the Colonel asked the boatman.

'Beech and another wood that is cheaper that I do not recall, at this
moment, the name of.'

'Beech is, to an open fire, as anthracite coal is to a stove.  Where do
they cut that beech?'

'I'm not a man of the mountains.  But I think it comes from up beyond
Bassano on the other side of the Grappa.  I went there to the Grappa to
see where my brother was buried.  It was an excursion that they made
from Bassano, and we went to the big ossario.  But we returned by
Feltre.  I could see it was a fine timber country on the other side as
you came down the mountains into the valley.  We came down that
military road, and they were hauling lots of wood.'

'In what year was your brother killed on Grappa?'

'In nineteen-eighteen.  He was a patriot and inflamed by hearing
d'Annunzio talk, and he volunteered before his class was called.  We
never knew him very well because he went so quickly.'

'How many were you in the family?'

'We were six.  We lost two beyond the Isonzo, one on the Bainsizza and
one on the Carso.  Then we lost this brother I speak of on the Grappa
and I remained.'

'I'll get you the God-damned jeep complete with handles,' the Colonel
said.  'Now let's not be morbid and look for all the places where my
friends live.'

They were moving up the Grand Canal now and it was easy to see where
your friends lived.

'That's the house of the Contessa Dandolo,' the Colonel said.

He did not say, but thought, she is over eighty, and she is as gay as a
girl and does not have any fear of dying.  She dies her hair red and it
looks very well.  She is a good companion and an admirable woman.

Her palazzo was pleasant looking, set well back from the Canal with a
garden in front and a landing place of its own where many gondolas had
come, in their various times, bringing hearty, cheerful, sad and
disillusioned people.  But most of them had been cheerful because they
were going to see the Contessa Dandolo.

Now, beating up the Canal, against the cold wind off the mountains, and
with the houses as clear and sharp as on a winter day, which, of
course, it was, they saw the old magic of the city and its beauty.  But
it was conditioned, for the Colonel, by his knowing many of the people
who lived in the palazzos; or if no one lived there now, knowing to
what use the different places had been put.

There's Alvarito's mother's house, he thought, and did not say.

She never lives there much and stays out at the country house near
Treviso where they have trees.  She's tired of there not being trees in
Venice.  She lost a fine man and nothing really interests her now
except efficiency.

But the family at one time lent the house to George Gordon, Lord Byron,
and nobody sleeps now in Byron's bed nor in the other bed, two flights
below, where he used to sleep with the gondolier's wife.  They are not
sacred, nor relics.  They are just extra beds that were not used
afterwards for various reasons, or possibly to respect Lord Byron who
was well loved in this town, in spite of all the errors he committed.
You have to be a tough boy in this town to be loved, the Colonel
thought.  They never cared anything for Robert Browning, nor Mrs.
Robert Browning, nor for their dog.  They weren't Venetians no matter
how well he wrote of it.  And what is a tough boy, he asked himself.
You use it so loosely you should be able to define it.  I suppose it is
a man who will make his play and then backs it up.  Or just a man who
backs his play.  And I'm not thinking of the theatre, he thought.
Lovely as the theatre can be.

And yet, he thought, seeing now the little villa, close up against the
water, ugly as a building you would see on the boat train from Havre or
Cherbourg, coming into the banlieue before Paris as you came into town.
It was overrun with badly administered trees, and not a place that you
would live in if you could help it.  There _he_ lived.

They loved him for his talent, and because he was bad, and he was
brave.  A Jewish boy with nothing, he stormed the country with his
talent, and his rhetoric.  He was a more miserable character than any
that I know and as mean.  But the man I think of to compare him with
never put the chips on the line and went to war, the Colonel thought,
and Gabriele d'Annunzio (I always wondered what his real name was, he
thought, because nobody is named d'Annunzio in a practical country and
perhaps he was not Jewish and what difference did it make if he was or
was not) had moved through the different arms of the service as he had
moved into and out of the arms of different women.

All the arms were pleasant that d'Annunzio served with and the mission
was fast and easily over, except the Infantry.  He remembered how
d'Annunzio had lost an eye in a crash, flying as an observer, over
Trieste or Pola, and how, afterwards, he had always worn a patch over
it and people who did not know, for, then, no one really knew, thought
it had been shot out at the Veliki or San Michele or some other bad
place beyond the Carso where everyone died, or was incapacitated, that
you knew.  But d'Annunzio, truly, was only making heroic gestures with
the other things.  An Infantryman knows a strange trade, he thought;
perhaps the strangest.  He, Gabriele, flew, but he was not a flier.  He
was in the Infantry but he was not an Infantryman and it was always the
same appearances.

And the Colonel remembered one time when he had stood, commanding a
platoon of assault troops, while it was raining in one of the
interminable winters, when the rain fell always; or at least, always
when there were parades or speeches to the troops, and d'Annunzio, with
his lost eye, covered by the patch, and his white face, as white as the
belly of a sole, new turned over in the market, the brown side not
showing, and looking thirty hours dead, was shouting.  'Morire non a
basta,' and the Colonel, then a lieutenant, had thought, 'What the muck
more do they want of us?'

But he had followed the discourse and, at the end, when the
Lieutenant-Colonel d'Annunzio, writer and national hero, certified and
true if you must have heroes, and the Colonel did not believe in
heroes, asked for a moment of silence for our glorious dead, he had
stood stiffly to attention.  But his platoon, who had not followed the
speech, there being no loud speakers then, and they being slightly out
of hearing of the orator, responded, as one man, at the pause for the
moment of silence for our glorious dead, with a solid and ringing
'Evviva d'Annunzio'.

They had been addressed before by d'Annunzio after victories, and
before defeats, and they knew what they should shout if there was any
pause by an orator.

The Colonel, being then a lieutenant, and loving his platoon, had
joined with them and uttered, with the tone of command, 'Evviva
d'Annunzio', thus absolving all those who had not listened to the
discourse, speech, or harangue and attempting, in the small way a
lieutenant can attempt anything, except to hold an indefensible
position; or intelligently direct his own part in an attack; to share
their guilt.

But now he was passing the house where the poor beat-up old boy had
lived with his great, sad and never properly loved actress and he
thought of her wonderful hands and her so transformable face, that was
not beautiful, but that gave you all love, glory and delight and
sadness; and of the way the curve of her forearm could break your
heart, and he thought, Christ they are dead and I do not know where
either one is buried even.  But I certainly hope they had fun in that
house.

'Jackson,' he said, 'that small villa on the left belonged to Gabriele
d'Annunzio, who was a great writer.'

'Yes, sir,' said Jackson, 'I'm glad to know about him.  I never heard
of him.'

'I'll check you out on what he wrote if you ever want to read him,' the
Colonel said.  'There are some fair English translations.'

'Thank you, sir,' said Jackson.  'I'd like to read him any time I have
time.  He has a nice practical looking place.  What did you say the
name was?'

'D'Annunzio,' the Colonel said.  'Writer.'

He added to himself, not wishing to confuse Jackson, nor be difficult,
as he had been with the man several times that day, writer, poet,
national hero, phraser of the dialectic of Fascism, macabre egotist,
aviator, commander, or rider, in the first of the fast torpedo attack
boats, Lieutenant-Colonel of Infantry without knowing how to command a
company, nor a platoon properly, the great, lovely writer of _Notturno_
whom we respect, and jerk.

Up ahead now there was a crossing place of gondolas at the Santa Maria
del Giglio and, beyond, was the wooden dock of the Gritti.

'That's the hotel where we are stopping at, Jackson.'

The Colonel indicated the three-storey, rose-coloured, small, pleasant
palace abutting on the Canal.  It had been a dependence of the Grand
Hotel--but now it was its own hotel and a very good one.  It was
probably the best hotel, if you did not wish to be fawned on, or fussed
over, or over-flunkied, in a city of great hotels and the Colonel loved
it.

'It looks O.K. to me, sir,' Jackson said.

'It is O.K.,' the Colonel said.

The motor boat came gallantly up beside the piling of the dock.  Every
move she makes, the Colonel thought, is a triumph of the gallantry of
the ageing machine.  We do not have war horses now like old Traveller,
or Marbot's Lysette who fought, personally, at Eylau.  We have the
gallantry of worn through-rods that refuse to break; the cylinder head
that does not blow though it has every right to and the rest of it.

'We're at the dock, sir,' Jackson said.

'Where the hell else would we be, man.  Jump out while I settle with
this sportsman.'

He turned to the boatman and said, 'That was thirty-five hundred,
wasn't it?'

'Yes, my Colonel.'

'I'll not forget about the over-age jeep engine.  Take this and buy
your horse some oats.'

The porter, who was taking the bags from Jackson, heard this and
laughed.

'No veterinarian will ever fix his horse.'

'She still runs,' the boatman said.

'But she doesn't win any races,' the porter said.  'How are you, my
Colonel?'

'I couldn't be better,' the Colonel said.  'How are all the members of
the Order?'

'All members are well.'

'Good,' said the Colonel.  'I will go in and see the Grand Master.'

'He is waiting for you, my Colonel.'

'Let us not keep him waiting, Jackson,' the Colonel said.  'You may
proceed to the lobby with this gentleman and tell them to sign me in.
See the sergeant gets a room,' he said to the porter.  'We're here for
the night only.'

'The Baron Alvarito was here looking for you.'

'I'll find him at Harry's.'

'Good, my Colonel.'

'Where is the Grand Master?'

'I'll find him for you.'

'Tell him I'll be in the bar.'




Chapter VII

The bar was just across from the lobby of the Gritti, although lobby
the Colonel thought, was not the accurate term to describe that
gracious entrance.  Didn't Giotto describe a circle, he thought?  No,
that was in maths.  What he remembered and loved best as an anecdote
about that painter was: 'It was easy,' said Giotto as he drew the
perfect circle.  Who the hell had said that and where?

'Good evening, Privy Councillor,' he said to the bar-man, who was not a
full paid-up member of the order but whom he did not wish to offend.
'What can I do for you?'

'Drink, my Colonel.'

The Colonel looked out of the windows and the door of the bar on to the
waters of the Grand Canal.  He could see the big black hitching post
for the gondolas and the later afternoon winter light on the wind-swept
water.  Across the Canal was the old Palace and a wood barge, black and
broad, was coming up the Canal, her bluff bows pushing up a wave even
though she had the wind behind her.

'Make it a very dry Martini,' the Colonel said.  'A double.'

Just then the Grand Master came into the room.  He was wearing his
formal attire as a head waiter.  He was truly handsome as a man should
be, from the inside out, so that his smile starts from his heart, or
whatever is the centre of the body, and comes frankly and beautifully
to the surface, which is the face.

He had a fine face with the long, straight nose of his part of the
Veneto; the kind, gay, truthful eyes and the honourable white hair of
his age, which was two years older than that of the Colonel.

He advanced smiling, lovingly and yet conspiratorially, since they both
shared many secrets and he extended his hand, which was a big, long,
strong, spatular-fingered hand; well kept as was becoming, as well as
necessary, to his position and the Colonel extended his own hand, which
had been shot through twice and was slightly misshapen.  Thus contact
was made between two old inhabitants of the Veneto, both men and
brothers in their membership in the human race, the only club that
either one paid dues to and brothers, too, in their love of an old
country, much fought over and always triumphant in defeat, which they
had both defended in their youth.

Their handshake was only long enough to feel, firmly, the contact and
the pleasure of meeting and then the Maitre d'Hotel said, 'My Colonel.'

The Colonel said, '_Gran Maestro_.'

Then the Colonel asked the _Gran Maestro_ to accompany him in a drink,
but the Maitre d'Hotel said that he was working.  It was impossible as
well as forbidden.

'---- forbidden,' said the Colonel.

'Of course,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But everyone must comply with
his duty and here the rules are reasonable and we all should comply
with them; me especially, as a matter of precept.'

'Not for nothing are you the _Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.

'Give me a small _Carpano punto e mezzo_,' the _Gran Maestro_ said to
the bar-tender, who was still outside of the Order for some small, not
defined, unstated reason.  'To drink to the ordine.'

Thus, violating orders and the principle of precept and example in
command, the Colonel and the _Gran Maestro_ downed a quick one.  They
did not hurry nor did the _Gran Maestro_ worry.  They simply made it
fast.

'Now, let us discuss the affairs of the Order,' the Colonel said.  'Are
we in the secret chamber?'

'We are,' said the _Gran Maestro_.  'Or I declare it to be such.'

'Continue,' said the Colonel.

The Order, which was a purely fictitious organization, had been founded
in a series of conversations between the _Gran Maestro_ and the
Colonel.  Its name was _El Ordine Militar, Nobile y Espirituoso de los
Caballeros de Brusadelli_.  The Colonel and the head waiter both spoke
Spanish and since that is the best language for founding orders, they
had used it in the naming of this one, which was named after a
particularly notorious multi-millionaire non-taxpaying profiteer of
Milan, who had, in the course of a dispute over property, accused his
young wife, publicly and legally through due process of law, of having
deprived him of his judgment through her extraordinary sexual demands.

'_Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.  'Have you heard from our Leader,
_The Reverend One_?'

'Not a word.  He is silent these days.'

'He must be thinking.'

'He must.'

'Perhaps he is meditating on new and more distinguished shameful acts.'

'Perhaps.  He has not given me any word.'

'But we can have confidence in him.'

'Until he dies,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'After that he can roast in
hell and we will revere his memory.'

'Giorgio,' the Colonel said.  'Give the _Gran Maestro_ another short
_Carpano_.'

'If it is your order,' the _Gran Maestro_ said, 'I can only obey.'

They touched glasses.

'Jackson,' the Colonel called.  'You're on the town.  You can sign here
for chow.  I don't want to see you until eleven hundred to-morrow in
the lobby, unless you get into trouble.  Do you have money?'

'Yes, sir,' Jackson said and thought, the old son of a bitch really is
as crazy as they say.  But he might have called me instead of shouting.

'I don't want to see you,' the Colonel said.

Jackson had entered the room and stood before him at a semblance of
attention.

'I'm tired of seeing you, because you worry and you don't have fun.
For Christ sake have yourself some fun.'

'Yes, sir.'

'You understand what I said?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Repeat it.'

'Ronald Jackson, T5 Serial Number 100678, will present himself in the
lobby of this Gritti Hotel at 11.00 to-morrow morning, I don't know the
date, sir, and will absent himself from the Colonel's sight and will
have some fun.  Or,' he added, 'will make every reasonable attempt to
attain that objective.'

'I'm sorry, Jackson,' the Colonel said.  'I'm a ----.'

'I beg to differ with the Colonel,' Jackson said.

'Thank you, Jackson,' the Colonel told him.  'Maybe I'm not.  I hope
you are correct.  Now muck off.  You've got a room here, or you should
have and you can sign for chow.  Now try and have some fun.'

'Yes, sir,' said Jackson.

When he was gone, the _Gran Maestro_ said to the Colonel, 'What is the
boy?  One of those _sad_ Americans?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'And by Jesus Christ we've got a lot of them.
Sad, self-righteous, over-fed and undertrained.  If they are
under-trained, it is my fault.  But we've got some good ones, too.'

'Do you think they would have done Grappa, Pasubio and the Basso Piave
as we did?'

'The good ones, yes.  Maybe better.  But you know, in our army, they
don't even shoot for self-inflicted wounds.'

'Jesus,' said the _Gran Maestro_.  He and the Colonel both remembered
the men who decided that they did not wish to die, not thinking that he
who dies on Thursday does not have to die on Friday and how one soldier
would wrap another's puttee-ed leg in a sandbag so there would be no
powder burns and loose off at his friend from as far a distance as he
figured he could hit the calf of the leg without hitting bone and then
fire twice over the parapet to alibi the shot.  They had this knowledge
shared between them and it was for this reason and for a true, good
hatred of all those who profited by war that they had founded the Order.

They knew, the two of them, who loved and respected each other, how
_poor_ boys who did not want to die, would share the contents of a
match-box to produce the infection that would keep them from the next
murderous frontal attack.

They knew about the other boys who put the big ten-centime pieces under
their arm-pits to produce jaundice.  And they knew, too, about the
richer boys who, in different cities, had paraffin injected under their
knee-caps so they would not have to go to the war.

They knew how garlic could be used to produce certain effects which
could absent a man from an attack and they knew all, or nearly all, of
the other tricks; for one had been a sergeant and the other a
lieutenant of infantry and they had fought on the three key points,
Pasubio, Grappa and the Piave, where it all made sense.

They had fought, too, in the earlier stupid butchery on the Isonzo and
the Carso.  But they were both ashamed of those who had ordered that
and they never thought about it except as a shameful, stupid thing to
be forgotten and the Colonel remembered it technically as something to
learn from.  So, now, they had founded the Order of Brusadelli; noble,
military and religious, and there were only five members.

'What is the news of the Order?' the Colonel asked the _Gran Maestro_.

'We have ascended the cook at the Magnificent to the rank of
Commendatore.  He comported himself as a man three times on his
fiftieth birthday.  I accepted his statement without corroboration.  He
never lied ever.'

'No.  He never lied.  But it is a topic on which you must be chary in
your credibility.'

'I believed him.  He looked ruined.'

'I can remember him when he was a tough kid and we called him the
cherry buster.'

'_Anch' io_.'

'Have you any concrete plans for the Order during the winter?'

'No, Supreme Commander.'

'Do you think we should give a homage to the Honourable Pacciardi?'

'As you wish.'

'Let's defer it,' the Colonel said.  He thought a moment, and signalled
for another dry Martini.

'Do you think we might organize a homage and manifestation in some
historic place such as San Marco or the old Church at Torcello in
favour of our Great Patron, Brusadelli, the Revered One?'

'I doubt if the religious authorities would permit it at this moment.'

'Then let us abandon all ideas of public manifestations for this
winter, and work within our cadres, for the good of the Order.'

'I think that is soundest,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'We will regroup.'

'And how are you, yourself?'

'Awful,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'I have low blood pressure, ulcers
and I owe money.'

'Are you happy?'

'All the time,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'I like my work very much and
I meet extraordinary and interesting characters, also many Belgians.
They are what we have instead of the locusts this year.  Formerly we
had the Germans.  What was it Caesar said, 'And the bravest of these
are the Belgians.'  But not the best dressed.  Do you agree?'

'I've seen them quite well costumed in Brussels,' the Colonel said.  'A
well-fed, gay capital.  Win, lose, or draw.'

'We should have fought in Flanders in the old days.'

'We were not born in the old days,' the Colonel said.  'So we
automatically could not have fought then.'

'I wish we could have fought with the Condottieri when all you had to
do was out-think them and they conceded.  You could think and I would
convey your orders.'

'We'd have to take a few towns for them to respect our thinking.'

'We would sack them if they defended them,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.
'What towns would you take?'

'Not this one,' the Colonel said.  'I'd take Vicenza, Bergamo and
Verona.  Not necessarily in that order.'

'You'd have to take two more.'

'I know,' the Colonel said.  He was a general now again and he was
happy.  'I figured that I'd by-pass Brescia.  It could fall of its own
weight.'

'And how are you, Supreme Commander?' the _Gran Maestro_ said, for this
taking of towns had pulled him out of his depth.

He was at home in his small house in Treviso, close to the fast-flowing
river under the old walls.  The weeds waved in the current and the fish
hung in the shelter of the weeds and rose to insects that touched the
water in the dusk.  He was at home, too, in all operations that did not
involve more than a company and understood them as clearly as he
understood the proper serving of a small dining-room; or a large
dining-room.

But when the Colonel became a general officer again, as he had once
been and thought in terms that were as far beyond him as calculus is
distant from a man who has only the knowledge of arithmetic, then he
was not at home and their contact was strained and he wished the
Colonel would return to things they both knew together when they were a
lieutenant and a sergeant.

'What would you do about Mantova?' the Colonel asked.

'I do not know, my Colonel.  I do not know whom you are fighting, nor
what forces are at your disposal.'

'I thought you said we were Condottieri.  Based on this town or on
Padova.'

'My Colonel,' the _Gran Maestro_ said, and he had diminished in no way,
'I know nothing, truly, about Condottieri.  Nor really how they fought
then.  I only said I would like to fight under you in such times.'

'There aren't any such times any more,' the Colonel said and the spell
was broken.

What the hell, maybe there never was any spell, the Colonel thought.
The hell with you, he said to himself.  Cut it out and be a human being
when you're half a hundred years old.

'Have another _Carpano_,' he said to the _Gran Maestro_.

'My Colonel, you will allow me to refuse because of the ulcers?'

'Yes.  Yes.  Of course.  Boy, what's your name, Giorgio?  Another dry
Martini.  _Secco, molto secco e doppio_.'

Breaking spells, he thought.  It is not my trade.  My trade is killing
armed men.  A spell should be armed if I'm to break it.  But we have
killed many things which were not armed.  All right, spell breaker,
retract.

'_Gran Maestro_,' he said.  'You are still _Gran Maestro_ and ---- the
Condottieri.'

'They were ---- many years ago, Supreme Commander.'

'Exactly,' the Colonel said.

But the spell was broken.

'I'll see you at dinner,' the Colonel said.  'What is there?'

'We will have anything you wish and what we do not have I will send out
for.'

'Do you have any fresh asparagus?'

'You know we cannot have it in these months.  It comes in April and
from Bassano.'

'Then you think of something and I'll eat it,' the Colonel said,

'How many will you be?' the Maitre d'Hotel asked.

'We'll be two,' the Colonel said.  'What time do you close the bistro?'

'We will serve dinner as late as you wish to eat, my Colonel.'

'I'll try to be in at a sound hour,' the Colonel said.  'Good-bye,
_Gran Maestro_,' he said and smiled and gave the _Gran Maestro_ his
crooked hand.

'Good-bye, Supreme Commander,' said the _Gran Maestro_ and the spell
was existent again and almost complete.

But it was not quite complete and the Colonel knew it and he thought:
why am I always a bastard and why can I not suspend this trade of arms
and be a kind and good man as I would have wished to be.

I try always to be just, but I am brusque and I am brutal and it is not
that I have erected the defence against brown-nosing my superiors and
brown-nosing the world.  I should be a better man with less wild boar
blood in the small time which remains.  We will try it out to-night, he
thought.  With whom, he thought and where, and God help me not to be
bad.

'Giorgio,' he said to the barman, who had a face as white as a leper,
but with no bulges and without the silver shine.

Giorgio did not really like the Colonel very much, or perhaps he was
simply from Piemonte and cared for no one truly; which was
understandable in cold people from a border province.  Borderers are
not trusters and the Colonel knew about this and expected nothing from
anyone that they did not have to give.

'Giorgio,' he said to the pale-faced barman.  'Write these down for me,
please.'

He went out, walking as he had always walked, with a slightly
exaggerated confidence, even when it was not needed and, in his always
renewed plan of being kind, decent and good, he greeted the concierge,
who was a friend, the assistant manager, who spoke Swahili and had been
a prisoner of war in Kenya and was a most amiable man, young, full of
juice, handsome, perhaps not yet a member of the Order, and experienced.

'And the _cavaliere ufficiale_ who manages this place?' he asked.  'My
friend?'

'He is not here,' the assistant manager said.  'For the moment,
naturally,' he added.

'Give him my compliments,' the Colonel said.  'And have somebody show
me to my room.'

'It is the usual room.  You still wish it?'

'Yes.  Have you taken care of the Sergeant?'

'He is well taken care of.'

'Good,' said the Colonel.

The Colonel proceeded to his room accompanied by the boy who carried
his bag.

'This way, my Colonel,' the boy said, when the elevator halted with
slight hydraulic inaccuracy at the top floor.

'Can't you run an elevator properly?' the Colonel asked.

'No, my Colonel,' the boy said.  'The current is not stable.'




Chapter VIII

The colonel said nothing and preceded the boy down the corridor.  It
was large, wide and high ceilinged and there was a long and
distinguished interval between the doors of the rooms on the side of
the Grand Canal.  Naturally, since it had been a palace, there were no
rooms without excellent views, except those which had been made for the
servants.

The Colonel found the walk long, although it was a very short one and
when the waiter, who served the room, appeared, short, dark and with
his glass eye in the left eye socket, gleaming, unable to smile his
full, true smile as he worked the big key in the lock, the Colonel
wished that the door would open more rapidly.

'Open it up,' he said.

'I will, my Colonel,' the waiter said.  'But you know these locks.'

Yes, the Colonel thought.  I know them, but I wish that he would get it
open.

'How are your family?' he said to the waiter, who had swung the door
wide so that the Colonel, now entered, was within the room with the
high, dark but well-mirrored armoire, the two good beds, the great
chandelier and the view, through the still closed windows, on to the
wind-beaten water of the Grand Canal.

The Canal was grey as steel now in the quick, failing, winter light and
the Colonel said, 'Arnaldo, open the windows.'

'There is much wind, my Colonel, and the room is badly heated due to
the lack of electric power.'

'Due to the lack of rainfall,' the Colonel said.  'Open the windows.
All of them.'

'As you wish, my Colonel.'

The waiter opened the windows and the north wind came into the room.

'Please call the desk and ask them to ring this number.'  The waiter
made the call while the Colonel was in the bathroom.

'The Contessa is not at home, my Colonel,' he said.  'They believe you
might find her at Harry's.'

'You find everything on earth at Harry's.'

'Yes, my Colonel.  Except, possibly, happiness.'

'I'll damn well find happiness, too,' the Colonel assured him.
'Happiness, as you know, is a movable feast.'

'I am aware of that,' the waiter said.  'I have brought Campari bitters
and a bottle of Gordon Gin.  May I make you a Campari with gin and
soda?'

'You're a good boy,' the Colonel said.  'Where did you bring them from.
The bar?'

'No.  I bought them while you were away so that you would not have to
spend money at the bar.  The bar is very costly.'

'I agree,' the Colonel agreed.  'But you should not use your own money
on such a project.'

'I took a chance.  We have both taken many.  The gin was 3200 lire and
is legitimate.  The Campari was 800.'

'You're a very good boy,' the Colonel told him.  'How were the ducks?'

'My wife still speaks of them.  We had never had wild ducks, since they
are of such expense, and outside of our way of life.  But one of our
neighbours told her how to prepare them and these same neighbours ate
them with us.  I never knew that anything could be so wonderful to eat.
When your teeth close on the small slice of meat it is an almost
unbelievable delight.'

'I think so, too.  There is nothing lovelier to eat than those fat
iron-curtain ducks.  You know their fly-way is through the great grain
fields of the Danube.  This is a splinter flight we have here, but they
always come the same way since before there were shot-guns.'

'I know nothing about shooting for sport,' the waiter said.  'We were
too poor.'

'But many people without money shoot in the Veneto.'

'Yes.  Of course.  One hears them shoot all night.  But we were poorer
than that.  We were poorer than you can know, my Colonel.'

'I think I can know.'

'Perhaps,' the waiter said.  'My wife also saved all the feathers and
she asked me to thank you.'

'If we have any luck the day after to-morrow, we'll get plenty.  The
big ducks with the green heads.  Tell your wife, with luck, there will
be good eating ducks, fat as pigs with what they have eaten from the
Russians and with beautiful feathers.'

'How do you feel about the Russians, if it is not indiscreet to ask, my
Colonel?'

'They are our potential enemy.  So, as a soldier, I am prepared to
fight them.  But I like them very much and I have never known finer
people nor people more as we are.'

'I have never had the good fortune to know them.'

'You will, boy.  You will.  Unless the Honourable Pacciardi stops them
on the line of the Piave, which is a river which no longer contains
water.  It has been siphoned off for hydro-electric projects.  Perhaps
the Honorable Pacciardi will fight there.  But I do not think he will
fight for long.'

'I do not know the Honourable Pacciardi.'

'I know him,' said the Colonel.

'Now ask them to ring Harry's and see if the Contessa is there.  If
not, have them ring the house again.'

The Colonel took the drink Arnaldo, the glass-eyed waiter, made him.
He did not want it and he knew that it was bad for him.

But he took it with his old wild-boar truculence, as he had taken
everything all of his life and he moved, still cat-like when he moved,
although it was an old cat now, over to the open window and looked out
on the great Canal which was now becoming as grey as though Degas had
painted it on one of his greyest days.

'Thanks very much for the drink,' the Colonel said and Arnaldo, who was
talking into the telephone, nodded and smiled his glass-eyed smile.

I wish he did not have to have that glass eye, the Colonel thought.  He
only loved people, he thought, who had fought or been mutilated.

Other people were fine and you liked them and were good friends; but
you only felt true tenderness and love for those who had been there and
had received the castigation that everyone receives who goes there long
enough.

So I'm a sucker for cripes, he thought, drinking the unwanted drink.
And any son of a bitch who has been hit solidly, as every man will be
if he stays, then I love him.

Yes, his other, good side said.  You love them.

I'd rather not love anyone, the Colonel thought.  I'd rather have fun.

And fun, his good side said to him, you have no fun when you do not
love.

All right.  I love more than any son of the great bitch alive, the
Colonel said, but not aloud.

Aloud, he said, 'Where are you getting on that call, Arnaldo?'

'Cipriani has not come in,' the waiter said.  'They are expecting him
at any moment and I am keeping the line open in case he arrives.'

'A costly procedure,' the Colonel said.  'Get me a reading on who's
there so we don't waste time.  I want to know exactly who is there.'

Arnaldo spoke guardedly into the mouthpiece of the telephone.

He covered the mouth of the phone with his hand and said, 'I am talking
to Ettore.  He says the Barone Alvarito is not there.  The Count Andrea
is there and he is rather drunk, Ettore says, but not too drunk for you
to have fun together.  The group of ladies that comes in each afternoon
are there and there is a Greek princess, that you know and several
people that you do not know.  Riff-raff from the American Consulate who
have stayed on since noon.'

'Tell him to call back when the riff-raff goes and I'll come over.'

Arnaldo spoke into the phone, then turned to the Colonel who was
looking out of the window at the Dome of the Dogana, 'Ettore says he
will try to move them, but he is afraid Cipriani will not like it.'

'Tell him not to move them.  They don't have to work this afternoon and
there is no reason why they should not get drunk like any other man.  I
just don't want to see them.'

'Ettore says he will call back.  He told me to tell you he thinks the
position will fall of its own weight.'

'Thank him for calling,' the Colonel said.

He watched a gondola working up the Canal against the wind and thought,
not with Americans drinking.  I know they are bored.  In this town,
too.  They are bored in this town.  I know the place is cold and their
wages are inadequate and what fuel costs.  I admire their wives, for
the valiant efforts they make to transport Keokuk to Venice, and their
children already speak Italian like little Venetians.  But no snapshots
to-day, Jack.  To-day we are giving the snapshots, the bar-room
confidences, the unwanted comradely drinks and the tedious woes of the
Consular services a miss.

'No second, third or fourth vice-consuls to-day, Arnaldo.'

'There are some very pleasant people from the Consulate.'

'Yeah,' the Colonel said.  'They had a hell of a nice consul here in
1918.  Everybody liked him.  I'll try to remember his name.'

'You go back a long way back, my Colonel.'

'I go back so damn far back that it isn't funny.'

'Do you remember everything from the old days?'

'Everything,' the Colonel said.  'Carroll was the man's name.'

'I have heard of him.'

'You weren't born then.'

'Do you think it is necessary to have been born at the time to know
about things that have happened in this town, my Colonel?'

'You're perfectly correct.  Tell me, does everybody always know about
everything that happens in this town?'

'Not everybody.  But nearly everybody,' the waiter said.  'After all,
sheets are sheets and someone has to change them and someone has to
wash them.  Naturally I do not refer to the sheets in a hotel such as
this.'

'I've had some damn good times in my life without sheets.'

'Naturally.  But the gondoliers, while they are the most co-operative
and, for me, the finest people that we have, speak among themselves.'

'Naturally.'

'Then the clergy.  While they would never violate the secrecy of the
confessional, talk among themselves.'

'It is to be expected.'

'Their housekeepers talk among themselves.'

'It is their right.'

'Then the waiters,' Arnaldo said.  'People talk at a table as though
the waiter were stone-deaf.  The waiter, according to his ethics, makes
no attempt to ever overhear a conversation.  But sometimes he cannot
escape from hearing.  Naturally, we have our own conversations among
ourselves.  Never in this hotel of course.  I could go on.'

'I believe I get the point.'

'Not to mention the coiffeurs and the hair-dressers.'

'And what's the news from the Rialto now?'

'You will get it all at Harry's except the part you figure in.'

'Do I figure?'

'Everyone knows everything.'

'Well, it's a damn pleasant story.'

'Some people don't understand the Torcello part.'

'I'm damned if I do sometimes myself.'

'How old are you, my Colonel, if it is not too indiscreet to ask?'

'Fifty plus one.  Why didn't you find out from the concierge?  I fill
out a slip there for the Questura.'

'I wanted to hear it from you yourself and to congratulate you.'

'I don't know what you are talking about.'

'Let me congratulate you anyway.'

'I can't accept it.'

'You are very well liked in this city.'

'Thank you.  That is a very great compliment.'

Just then the telephone buzzed.

'I'll take it,' the Colonel said and heard Ettore's voice say, 'Who
speaks?'

'Colonel Cantwell.'

'The position has fallen, my Colonel.'

'Which way did they go?'

'Towards the Piazza.'

'Good.  I will be there at once.'

'Do you want a table?'

'In the corner,' said the Colonel and hung up.

'I am off for Harry's.'

'Good hunting.'

'I hunt ducks day after tomorrow before first light in a botte in the
marshes.'

'It will be cold, too.'

'I dare say,' the Colonel said and put on his trench coat and looked at
his face in the glass of the long mirror as he put on his cap.

'An ugly face,' he said to the glass.  'Did you ever see a more ugly
face?'

'Yes,' said Arnaldo.  'Mine.  Every morning when I shave.'

'We both ought to shave in the dark,' the Colonel told him and went out
the door.




Chapter IX

As Colonel Cantwell stepped out of the door of the Gritti Palace Hotel
he came out into the last sunlight of that day.  There was still
sunlight on the opposite side of the Square but the gondoliers
preferred to be sheltered from the cold wind by lounging in the lee of
the Gritti, than to use the last remaining heat of the sun on the
wind-swept side of the Square.

After noting this, the Colonel turned to the right and walked along the
Square to the paved street which turned off on the right.  As he
turned, he stopped for a moment and looked at the church of Santa Maria
del Giglio.

What a fine, compact, and yet ready to be air-borne building, he
thought.  I never realized a small church could look like a P47.  Must
find out when it was built and who built it.  Damn, I wish I might walk
around this town all my life.  All my life, he thought.  What a gag
that is.  A gag to gag on.  A throttle to throttle you with.  Come on,
boy, he said to himself.  No horse named Morbid ever won a race.

Besides, he thought, as he looked in the windows of the various shops
he passed, the _charcuteri_ with the Parmesan cheeses and the hams from
San Daniele and the sausages _alla cacciatora_ and the bottles of good
Scotch whisky and real Gordon's gin, the cutlery store, an antique
dealer's with some good pieces and some old maps and prints, a
second-rate restaurant disguised expensively as one of the first class
and then came to the first bridge crossing a feeder canal with steps to
be climbed; I don't feel so badly.  There is only the buzzing.  I
remember when that started and I thought perhaps it was seven-year
locusts in the trees and I did not like to ask young Lowry but I did.
And he answered, 'No, General, I don't hear any crickets or seven-year
locusts.  The night is perfectly quiet except for the usual noises.'

Then, as he climbed, he felt the twinges and coming down the other
side, he saw two lovely looking girls.  They were beautiful and hatless
and poorly but chicly dressed, and they were talking very fast to each
other and the wind was blowing their hair as they climbed with their
long, easy striding Venetian legs and the Colonel said to himself, 'I'd
better quit window gazing along this street and make that next bridge
and two squares afterwards you turn due right and keep along it till
you are in Harry's.'

He did just that, twinging on the bridge, but walking with his same old
stride and only seeing, quickly, the people that he passed.  There's a
lot of oxygen in this air, he thought, as he faced into the wind and
breathed deeply.

Then he was pulling open the door of Harry's bar and was inside and he
had made it again and was at home.

At the bar a tall, very tall, man, with a ravaged face of great
breeding, merry blue eyes and the long, loose-coupled body of a buffalo
wolf said, 'My ancient and depraved Colonel.'

'My wicked Andrea.'

They embraced and the Colonel felt the rough texture of Andrea's
handsome tweed coat that must have been entering, at least, its
twentieth year.

'You look well, Andrea,' the Colonel said.

It was a lie and they both knew it.

'I am,' said Andrea, returning the lie.  'I must say I never felt
better.  You look extraordinarily well, yourself.'

'Thank you, Andrea.  Us healthy bastards shall inherit the earth.'

'Very good idea.  I must say I wouldn't mind inheriting something these
days.'

'You have no kick.  You'll inherit well over six feet four of it.'

'Six feet six,' said Andrea.  'You wicked old man.  Are you still
slaving away at _la vie militaire_?'

'I don't slave too hard at it,' the Colonel said.  'I'm down to shoot
at San Relajo.'

'I know.  But don't make jokes in Spanish at this hour.  Alvarito was
looking for you.  He said to tell you he'd be back.'

'Good.  Is your lovely wife and are the children well?'

'Absolutely, and they asked me to remember them to you if I saw you.
They're down in Rome.  There comes your girl.  Or one of your girls.'
He was so tall he could see into the now almost dark street, but this
was a girl you could recognize if it was much darker than it was at
this hour.

'Ask her to have a drink with us here before you carry her off to that
corner table.  Isn't she a lovely girl?'

'She is.'

Then she came into the room, shining in her youth and tall striding
beauty and the carelessness the wind had made of her hair.  She had a
pale, almost olive-coloured skin, a profile that could break your, or
anyone else's, heart and her dark hair, of an alive texture, hung down
over her shoulders.

'Hello, my great beauty,' the Colonel said.

'Oh, oh, hello,' she said.  'I thought I would miss you.  I am so sorry
to be late.'

Her voice was low and delicate and she spoke English with caution.

'_Ciao_, Andrea,' she said.  'How is Emily and are the children?'

'Probably just the same as when I answered that same question for you
at noon.'

'I am so sorry,' she said and blushed.  'I am so excited and I always
say the wrong things.  What should I say?  Have you had a good time
here all afternoon?'

'Yes,' said Andrea.  'With my old friend and severest critic.'

'Who is that?'

'Scotch whisky and water.'

'I suppose if he must tease me he must,' she said to the Colonel.  'But
you won't tease me, will you?'

'Take him over to that corner table and talk to him.  I'm tired of you
both.'

'I'm not tired of you,' the Colonel told him.  'But I think it is a
good idea.  Should we have a drink sitting down, Renata?'

'I'd love to if Andrea isn't angry.'

'I'm never angry.'

'Would you have a drink with us, Andrea?'

'No,' said Andrea.  'Get along to your table.  I'm sick of seeing it
unoccupied.'

'Good-bye, Carlo.  Thanks for the drink we didn't have.'

'_Ciao_, Ricardo,' Andrea said and that was all.

He turned his fine, long, tall back on them and looked into the mirror
that is placed behind bars so a man can tell when he is drinking too
much and decided that he did not like what he saw there.  'Ettore,' he
said.  'Please put this nonsense on my bill.'

He walked out after waiting carefully for his coat, swinging into it
and tipping the man who brought it exactly what he should be tipped
plus twenty per cent.

At the corner table, Renata said, 'Do you think we hurt his feelings?'

'No.  He loves you and he likes me.'

'Andrea is so nice.  And you're so nice.'

'Waiter,' the Colonel called; then asked, 'Do you want a dry Martini,
too?'

'Yes,' she said.  'I'd love one.'

'Two very dry Martinis,' the Colonel said.  'Montgomerys.  Fifteen to
one.'

The waiter, who had been in the desert, smiled and was gone and the
Colonel turned to Renata.

'You're nice,' he said.  'You're also very beautiful and lovely and I
love you.'

'You always say that and I don't know what it means but I like to hear
it.'

'How old are you now?'

'Nearly nineteen.  Why?'

'And you don't know what it means?'

'No.  Why should I?  Americans always say it to you before they go
away.  It seems to be necessary to them.  But I love you very much,
too, whatever that is.'

'Let's have a fine time,' the Colonel said.  'Let's not think about
anything at all.'

'I would like that.  I cannot think very well this time of day at any
rate.'

'Here are the drinks,' the Colonel said.  'Remember not to say,
chin-chin.'

'I remember that from before.  I never say chin-chin, nor here's to
you, nor bottoms up.'

'We just raise the glass to each other and, if you wish, we can touch
the edges.'

'I wish,' she said.

The Martinis were icy cold and true Montgomerys and, after touching the
edges, they felt them glow happily all through their upper bodies.

'And what have you been doing?' the Colonel asked.

'Nothing.  I still wait to go away to school.'

'Where now?'

'God knows.  Wherever I go to learn English.'

'Turn your head and raise your chin once for me.'

'You're not making fun?'

'No.  I'm not making fun.'

She turned her head and raised her chin, without vanity, nor coquetry
and the Colonel felt his heart turn over inside him, as though some
sleeping animal had rolled over in its burrow and frightened,
deliciously, the other animal sleeping close beside.

'Oh, you,' he said.  'Would you ever like to run for Queen of Heaven?'

'That would be sacrilegious.'

'Yes,' he said.  'I suppose it would and I withdraw the suggestion.'

'Richard,' she said.  'No, I can't say it.'

'Say it.'

'No.'

The Colonel thought, I order you to say it.  And she said, 'Please
never look at me like that.'

'I'm sorry,' the Colonel said.  'I had just slipped into my trade
unconsciously.'

'And if we were such a thing as married would you practise your trade
in the home?'

'No.  I swear it.  I never have.  Not in my heart.'

'With no one?'

'With no one of your sex.'

'I don't like that word your sex.  It sounds as though you were
practising your trade.'

'I throw my trade out of that God-damn window into the Grand Canal.'

'There,' she said.  'You see how quickly you practise it?'

'All right,' he said.  'I love you and my trade can gently leave.'

'Let me feel your hand,' she said.  'It's all right.  You can put it on
the table.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.

'Please don't,' she said.  'I wanted to feel it because all last week,
every night, or I think nearly every night, I dreamed about it and it
was a strange mixed-up dream and I dreamed it was the hand of Our Lord.'

'That's bad.  You oughtn't to do that.'

'I know it.  That's just what I dreamed.'

'You aren't on the junk, are you?'

'I don't know what you mean and please don't make fun when I tell you
something true.  I dreamed just as I say.'

'What did the hand do?'

'Nothing.  Or maybe that is not true.  Mostly it was just a hand.'

'Like this one?' The Colonel asked, looking at the mis-shapen hand with
distaste and remembering the two times that had made it that way.

'Not like.  It _was_ that one.  May I touch it carefully with my
fingers if it does not hurt?'

'It does not hurt.  Where it hurts is in the head, the legs and the
feet.  I don't believe there's any sensation in that hand.'

'You're wrong,' she said.  'Richard.  There is very much sensation in
that hand.'

'I don't like to look at it much.  You don't think we could skip it?'

'Of course.  But you don't have to dream about it.'

'No.  I have other dreams.'

'Yes.  I can imagine.  But I dream lately about this hand.  Now that I
have touched it carefully, we can talk about funny things if you like.
What is there funny we should talk about?'

'Let's look at the people and discuss them.'

'That's lovely,' she said.  'And we won't do it with malice.  Only with
our best wit.  Yours and mine.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'Waiter, _Ancora due Martini_.'

He did not like to call for Montgomerys in a tone that could be
overheard because there were two obvious Britishers at the next table.

The male might have been wounded, the Colonel thought, although, from
his looks, it seems unlikely.  But God help me to avoid brutality.  And
look at Renata's eyes, he thought.  They are probably the most
beautiful of all the beautiful things she has with the longest honest
lashes I have ever seen and she never uses them for anything except to
look at you honestly and straight.  What a damn wonderful girl and what
am I doing here anyway?  It is wicked.  She is your last and true and
only love, he thought, and that's not evil.  It is only unfortunate.
No, he thought, it is damned fortunate and you are very fortunate.

They sat at a small table in the corner of the room and on their right
there were four women at a larger table.  One of the women was in
mourning; a mourning so theatrical that it reminded the Colonel of the
Lady Diana Manners playing the nun in Max Reinhardt's 'The Miracle'.
This woman had an attractive, plump, naturally gay face and her
mourning was incongruous.

At the table there was another woman who had hair three times as white
as hair can be, the Colonel thought she, also, had a pleasant face.
There were two other women whose faces meant nothing to the Colonel.

'Are they lesbians?' he asked the girl.

'I do not know,' she said.  'They are all very nice people.'

'I should say they are lesbians.  But maybe they are just good friends.
Maybe they are both.  It means nothing to me and it was not a
criticism.'

'You are nice when you are gentle.'

'Do you suppose the word gentleman derives from a man who is gentle?'

'I do not know.' the girl said, and she ran her fingers very lightly
over the scarred hand.  'But I love you when you are gentle.'

'I'll try very hard to be gentle,' the Colonel said.  'Who do you
suppose that son of a bitch is at the table beyond them?'

'You don't stay gentle very long,' the girl said.  'Let us ask Ettore.'

They looked at the man at the third table.  He had a strange face like
an over-enlarged, disappointed weasel or ferret.  It looked as
pock-marked and as blemished as the mountains of the moon seen through
a cheap telescope and, the Colonel thought, it looked like Goebbels's
face, if Herr Goebbels had ever been in a plane that burned and not
been able to bale out before the fire reached him.

Above this face, which was ceaselessly peering, as though the answer
might be found by enough well directed glances and by queries, there
was black hair that seemed to have no connection with the human race.
The man looked as though he had been scalped and then the hair
replaced.  Very interesting, the Colonel thought.  Can he be a
compatriot?  Yes, he must.

A little spit ran out of the corner of his mouth as he spoke,
peeringly, with the elderly, wholesome looking woman who was with him.
She looks like anybody's mother in an illustration in _The Ladies' Home
Journal_, the Colonel thought.  _The Ladies' Home Journal_ was one of
the magazines received regularly at the Officers's Club in Trieste and
the Colonel looked through it when it came.  It is a wonderful
magazine, he thought, because it combines sexology and beautiful foods.
It makes me hungry both ways.

But who do you suppose that character is?  He looks like a caricature
of an American who has been run one half way through a meat chopper and
then been boiled, slightly, in oil.  I'm not being so gentle, he
thought.

Ettore, with his emaciated face and his love of joking and fundamental
and abiding disrespect, came over and the Colonel said, 'Who is that
spiritual character?'

Ettore shook his head.

The man was short and dark with glossy black hair that did not seem to
go with his strange face.  He looked, the Colonel thought, as though he
had forgotten to change his wig as he grew older.  Has a wonderful face
though, the Colonel thought.  Looks like some of the hills around
Verdun.  I don't suppose he could be Goebbels and he picked up that
face in the last days when they were all playing at Gotterdammerung.
_Komm' Susser Tod_, he thought.  Well they sure bought themselves a
nice big piece of Susser Tod at the end.

'You don't want a nice Susser Tod sandwich do you Miss Renata?'

'I don't think so,' the girl said.  'Though I love Bach and I am sure
Cipriani could make one.'

'I was not talking against Bach,' the Colonel said.

'I know it.'

'Hell,' the Colonel said.  'Bach was practically a co-belligerent.  As
you were,' he added.

'I don't think we have to talk against me.'

'Daughter,' the Colonel said.  'When will you learn that I might joke
against you because I love you?'

'Now,' she said.  'I've learned it.  But you know it's fun not to joke
too rough.'

'Good.  I've learned it.'

'How often do you think of me during the week?'

'All of the time.'

'No.  Tell me truly.'

'All of the time.  Truly.'

'Do you think it is this bad for everyone?'

'I wouldn't know,' the Colonel said.  'That's one of the things I would
not know.'

'I hope it's not this bad for everyone.  I had no idea it could be this
bad.'

'Well you know now.'

'Yes,' the girl said.  'I know now.  I know now and for keeps and for
always.  Is that the correct way to say it?'

'I know now is enough,' the Colonel said.  'Ettore, that character with
the inspiring face and the nice looking woman with him doesn't live at
the Gritti does he?'

'No,' Ettore said.  'He lives next door but he goes to the Gritti
sometimes to eat.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'It will be wonderful to see him if I should
ever be down-hearted.  Who is the woman with him?  His wife?  His
mother?  His daughter?'

'There you have me,' Ettore said.  'We haven't kept track of him in
Venice.  He has aroused neither love, hate, dislike, fear nor
suspicion.  Do you really want to know anything about him?  I could ask
Cipriani.'

'Let us skip him,' the girl said.  'Is that how you say it?'

'Let's skip him,' the Colonel said.

'When we have so little time, Richard.  He is rather a waste of time.'

'I was looking at him as at a drawing by Goya.  Faces are pictures,
too.'

'Look at mine and I will look at yours.  Please skip the man.  He
didn't come here to do anyone any harm.'

'Let me look at your face and you not look at mine.'

'No,' she said.  'That's not fair.  I have to remember yours all week.'

'And what do I do?' the Colonel asked her.

Ettore came over, unable to avoid conspiracy and, having gathered his
intelligence rapidly and as a Venetian should, said:

'My colleague who works at his hotel, says that he drinks three or four
highballs and then writes vastly and fluently far into the night.'

'I daresay that makes marvellous reading.'

'I daresay,' Ettore said.  'But it was hardly the method of Dante.'

'Dante was another _vieux con_,' the Colonel said.  'I mean as a man.
Not as a writer.'

'I agree,' Ettore said.  'I think you will find no one, outside of
Firenze, who has studied his life who would not agree.'

'Eff Florence,' the Colonel said.

'A difficult manoeuvre,' Ettore said.  'Many have attempted it but very
few have succeeded.  Why do you dislike it, my Colonel?'

'Too complicated to explain.  But it was the depot,' he said
_deposito_, 'of my old regiment when I was a boy.'

'That I can understand.  I have my own reasons for disliking it, too.
You know a good town?'

'Yes,' said the Colonel.  'This one.  A part of Milano; and Bologna.
And Bergamo.'

'Cipriani has a large store of vodka in case the Russians should come,'
Ettore said, loving to joke rough.

'They'll bring their own vodka, duty free.'

'Still I believe Cipriani is prepared for them.'

'Then he is the only man who is,' the Colonel said.  'Tell him not to
take any cheques from junior officers on the Bank of Odessa and thank
you for the data on my compatriot.  I won't take more of your time.'

Ettore left and the girl turned towards him and looked in his old steel
eyes and put both her hands on his bad one and said, 'You were quite
gentle.'

'And you are most beautiful and I love you.'

'It's nice to hear it anyway.'

'What are we going to do about dinner?'

'I will have to call my home and find out if I can come out.'

'Why do you look sad now?'

'Do I?'

'Yes.'

'I am not, really.  I am as happy as I ever am.  Truly.  Please believe
me, Richard.  But how would you like to be a girl nineteen years old in
love with a man over fifty years old that you knew was going to die?'

'You put it a little bluntly,' the Colonel said.  'But you are very
beautiful when you say it.'

'I never cry,' the girl said.  'Never.  I made a rule not to.  But I
would cry now.'

'Don't cry,' the Colonel said.  'I'm gentle now and the hell with the
rest of it.'

'Say once again that you love me.'

'I love you and I love you and I love you.'

'Will you do your best not to die?'

'Yes.'

'What did the doctor say?'

'So-so.'

'Not worse?'

'No,' he lied.

'Then let us have another Martini,' the girl said.  'You know I never
drank a Martini until we met.'

'I know.  But you drink them awfully well.'

'Shouldn't you take the medicine?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I should take the medicine.'

'May I give it to you?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'You may give it to me.'

They continued to sit at the table in the corner and some people went
out and others came in.  The Colonel felt a little dizzy from the
medicine and he let it ride.  That's the way it always is, he thought.
To hell with it.

He saw the girl watching him and he smiled at her.  It was an old smile
that he had been using for fifty years, ever since he first smiled and
it was still as sound as your grandfather's Purdey shot-gun.  I guess
my older brother has that, he thought.  Well, he could always shoot
better than I could and he deserves it.

'Listen, Daughter,' he said.  'Don't be sorry for me.'

'I'm not.  Not at all.  I just love you.'

'It isn't much of a trade is it?'  He said _oficio_ instead of trade,
because they spoke Spanish together, too, when they left French and
when they did not wish to speak English before other people.  Spanish
is a rough language, the Colonel thought, rougher than a corncob
sometimes.  But you can say what you mean in it and make it stick.

'_Es un oficio bastante malo_,' he repeated, 'loving me.'

'Yes.  But it is the only one I have.'

'Don't you write any more poetry?'

'It was young girl poetry.  Like young girl painting.  Everyone is
talented at a certain age.'

At what age do you become old in this country, the Colonel thought.  No
one is ever old in Venice, but they grow up very fast.  I grew up very
rapidly in the Veneto myself and I was never as old as I was at
twenty-one.

'How is your mother?' he asked lovingly.

'She is very well.  She does not receive and she sees almost no one
because of her sorrow.'

'Do you think she would mind if we had a baby?'

'I don't know.  She is very intelligent, you know.  But I would have to
marry someone, I suppose.  I don't really want to.'

'We could be married.'

'No,' she said.  'I thought it over and I thought we should not.  It is
just a decision as the one about crying.'

'Maybe you make wrong decisions.  Christ knows I've made a few and too
many men are dead from when I was wrong.'

'I think, perhaps, you exaggerate.  I don't believe you made many wrong
decisions.'

'Not many,' the Colonel said.  'But enough.  Three is plenty in my
trade and I made all three.'

'I'd like to know about them.'

'They'd bore you,' the Colonel told her.  'They beat the hell out of me
to remember them.  So what would they do to some outsider?'

'Am I an outsider?'

'No.  You're my true love.  My last and only and true love.'

'Did you make them early or late?  The decisions.'

'I made them early.  In the middle.  And late.'

'Wouldn't you tell me about them?  I would like to have a share in your
sad trade.'

'The hell with them,' the Colonel said.  'They were made and they've
all been paid for.  Only you can't pay for that.'

'Can you tell me about that and why?'

'No,' the Colonel said.  And that was the end of that.

'Then let's have fun.'

'Let's,' the Colonel said.  'With our one and only life.'

'Maybe there are others.  Other lives.'

'I don't think so,' the Colonel said.  'Turn your head sideways,
beauty.'

'Like this?'

'Like that,' the Colonel said.  'Exactly like that.'

So, the Colonel thought, here we come into the last round and I do not
know even the number of the round.  I have loved but three women and
have lost them thrice.

You lose them the same way you lose a battalion; by errors of judgment;
orders that are impossible to fulfil and through impossible conditions.
Also through brutality.

I have lost three battalions in my life and three women and now I have
a fourth and loveliest and where the hell does it end?

You tell me, General, and, incidentally, while we are discussing the
matter and it is frank discussion of the situation and in no sense a
Council of War, as you have so often pointed out to me General: GENERAL
WHERE IS YOUR CAVALRY?

I have thought so, he said to himself.  The Commanding Officer does not
know where his cavalry is and his cavalry are not completely accurate
as to their situation, nor their mission and they will, some of them,
_enough_, muck off as cavalry have always mucked off in all the wars
since they, the Cavalry, had the big horses.

'Beauty,' he said, '_Ma très chère et bien aimée_.  I am very dull and
I am sorry.'

'You are never dull, to me, and I love you and I only wish we could be
cheerful to-night.'

'We damn well will be,' said the Colonel.  'Do you know anything
particular we should be cheerful about?'

'We might be cheerful about us, and about the town.  You've often been
very cheerful.'

'Yes,' the Colonel agreed.  'I have been.'

'Don't you think we could do it once more?'

'Sure.  Of course.  Why not?'

'Do you see the boy with the wave in his hair, that is natural, and he
only pushes it a little, skilfully, to be more handsome?'

'I see him,' the Colonel said.

'He is a very good painter, but he has false teeth in front because he
was a little bit _pédéraste_ once and other _pédérastes_ attacked him
one night on the Lido when there was a full moon.'

'How old are you?'

'I will be nineteen.'

'How do you know this?'

'I know it from the Gondoliere.  This boy is a very good painter, for
now.  There aren't any really good painters now.  But with false teeth,
now, in his twenty-fifth year, what a thing.'

'I love you very truly,' the Colonel said.

'I love you very truly, too.  Whatever that means in American.  I also
love you in Italian, against all my judgment and all of my wishes.'

'We shouldn't wish for too God-damn much,' the Colonel said.  'Because
we are always liable to get it.'

'I agree,' she said.  'But I would like to get what I wish for now.'

Neither of them said anything and then the girl said, 'That boy, he is
a man now, of course, and goes with very many women to hide what he is,
painted my portrait once.  You can have it if you like.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.  'I would love it.'

'It is very romantic.  My hair is twice as long as it has ever been and
I look as though I were rising from the sea without the head wet.
Actually, you rise from the sea with the hair very flat and coming to
points at the end.  It is almost the look of a very nearly dead rat.
But Daddy paid him adequately for the portrait, and, while it is not
truly me, it is the way you like to think of me.'

'I think of you when you come from the sea too.'

'Of course.  Very ugly.  But you might like to have this portrait for a
souvenir.'

'Your lovely mother would not mind?'

'Mummy would not mind.  She would be glad to be rid of it, I think.  We
have better pictures in the house.'

'I love you and your mother both very much.'

'I must tell her,' the girl said.

'Do you think that pock-marked jerk is really a writer?'

'Yes.  If Ettore says so.  He loves to joke but he does not lie.
Richard, what is a jerk?  Tell me truly.'

'It is a little rough to state.  But I think it means a man who has
never worked at his trade (_oficio_) truly, and is presumptuous in some
annoying way.'

'I must learn to use the term properly.'

'Don't use it,' the Colonel said.

Then the Colonel asked, 'When do I get the portrait?'

'To-night if you wish it.  I'll have someone wrap it and send it from
the house.  Where will you hang it?'

'In my quarters.'

'And no one will come in and make remarks and speak badly of me?'

'No.  They damn well will not.  Also I'll tell them it is a portrait of
my daughter.'

'Did you ever have a daughter?'

'No.  I always wanted one.'

'I can be your daughter as well as everything else.'

'That would be incest.'

'I don't think that would be so terrible in a city as old as this and
that has seen what this city has seen.'

'Listen, Daughter.'

'Good,' she said.  'That was fine.  I liked it.'

'All right,' the Colonel said and his voice was thickened a little.  'I
liked it, too.'

'Do you see now why I lore you when I know better than to do it?'

'Look, Daughter.  Where should we dine?'

'Wherever you like.'

'Would you eat at the Gritti?'

'Of course.'

'Then call the house and ask for permission.'

'No.  I decided not to ask permission but to send word where I was
dining.  So they would not worry.'

'But do you really prefer the Gritti?'

'I do.  Because it is a lovely restaurant and it is where you live and
anyone can look at us that wants to.'

'When did you get like that?'

'I have always been like that.  I have never cared what anyone thought,
ever.  Nor have I ever done anything that I was ashamed of except tell
lies when I was a little girl and be unkind to people.'

'I wish we could be married and have five sons,' the Colonel said.

'So do I,' the girl said.  'And send them to the five corners of the
world.'

'Are there five corners to the world?'

'I don't know,' she said.  'It sounded as though there were when I said
it.  And now we are having run again, aren't we?'

'Yes, Daughter,' the Colonel said.

'Say it again.  Just as you said it.'

'Yes, Daughter.'

'Oh,' she said.  'People must be very complicated.  Please may I take
your hand?'

'It's so damned ugly and I dislike looking at it.'

'You don't know about your hand.'

'That's a matter of opinion,' he said.  'I'd say you were wrong,
Daughter.'

'Maybe I am wrong.  But we're having fun again and whatever the bad
thing was is gone now.'

'It's gone the way the mist is burned off the hollows in broken ground
when the sun comes out,' the Colonel said.  'And you're the sun.'

'I want to be the moon, too.'

'You are,' the Colonel told her.  'Also any particular planet that you
wish to be and I will give you an accurate location of the planet.
Christ, Daughter, you can be a God-damn constellation if you like.
Only that's an airplane.'

'I'll be the moon.  She has many troubles, too.'

'Yes.  Her sorrows come regularly.  But she always fills before she
wanes.'

'She looks so sad to me sometimes across the Canal, that I cannot stand
it.'

'She's been around a long time,' the Colonel said.

'Do you think we should have one more Montgomery?' the girl asked and
the Colonel noticed that the British were gone.

He had been noticing nothing but her lovely face.  I'll get killed
sometime that way, he thought.  On the other hand it is a form of
concentration I suppose.  But it is damned careless.

'Yes,' he said.  'Why not?'

'They make me feel very good,' the girl said.

'They have a certain effect on me, too, the way Cipriani makes them.'

'Cipriani is very intelligent.'

'He's more than that.  He's able.'

'Some day he'll own all Venice.'

'Not quite all,' the Colonel disagreed.  'He'll never own you.'

'No,' she said.  'Nor will anyone else unless you want me.'

'I want you, Daughter.  But I don't want to own you.'

'I know it,' the girl said.  'And that's one more reason why I love
you.'

'Let's get Ettore and have him call up your house.  You can tell them
about the portrait.'

'You are quite correct.  If you want the portrait to-night, I must
speak to the butler to have it wrapped and sent.  I will also ask to
speak to Mummy and tell her where we are dining, and, if you like, I
will ask her permission.'

'No,' the Colonel said.  'Ettore, two Montgomerys, super Montgomerys,
with garlic olives, not the big ones, and please call the home of this
lady and let her know when you have completed the communication.  And
all of this as rapidly as possible.'

'Yes, my Colonel.'

'Now, Daughter, let us resume the having of the fun.'

'It was resumed when you spoke,' she said.




Chapter X

They were walking, now, along the right side of the street that led to
the Gritti.  The wind was at their backs and it blew the girl's hair
forward.  The wind parted her hair in the back and blew it forward
about her face.  They were looking in the shop windows and the girl
stopped in front of the lighted window of a jewellery shop.

There were many good pieces of old jewellery in the window and they
stood and looked at them and pointed out the best ones to each other,
unclasping their hands to do so.

'Is there anything you really want?  I could get it in the morning.
Cipriani would loan me the money.'

'No,' she said.  'I do not want anything but I notice that you never
give me presents.'

'You are much richer than I am.  I bring you small things from the PX
and I buy you drinks and meals.'

'And take me in gondolas and to lovely places in the country.'

'I never thought you wanted presents of hard stones.'

'I don't.  It is just the thought of giving and then one looks at them
and thinks about them when they are worn.'

'I'm learning,' the Colonel said.  'But what could I buy you on Army
pay that would be like your square emeralds?'

'But don't you see.  I inherited them.  They came from my grandmother,
and she had them from her mother who had them from her mother.  Do you
think it is the same to wear stones that come from dead people?'

'I never thought about it.'

'You can have them if you like, if you like stones.  To me they are
only something to wear like a dress from Paris.  You don't like to wear
your dress uniform, do you?'

'No.'

'You don't like to carry a sword, do you?'

'No, repeat, no.'

'You are not that kind of a soldier and I am not that sort of girl.
But some time give me something lasting that I can wear and be happy
each time I wear it.'

'I see,' the Colonel said.  'And I will.'

'You learn fast about things you do not know,' the girl said.  'And you
make lovely quick decisions.  I would like you to have the emeralds and
you could keep them in your pocket like a lucky piece, and feel them if
you were lonely.'

'I don't put my hands much in my pockets when I'm working.  I usually
twirl a stick, or something, or point things out with a pencil.'

'But you could put your hand in your pocket only once in a long time
and feel them.'

'I'm not lonely when I'm working.  I have to think too hard to ever be
lonely.'

'But you are not working now.'

'No.  Only preparing the best way to be overrun.'

'I'm going to give them to you anyway.  I'm quite sure Mummy will
understand.  Also I won't need to tell her for quite a long time.  She
keeps no check on my things.  I'm sure my maid would never tell her.'

'I don't think I should take them.'

'You should, please, to give me pleasure.'

'I'm not sure it's honourable.'

'That is like not being sure whether you are a virgin.  What you do to
give pleasure to another whom you love is most honourable.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'I will take them for better or for
worse.'

'Now you say thank you,' the girl said and slipped them into his pocket
as quickly and ably as a jewel thief might.  'I brought them with me
because I have been thinking and deciding about this all week.'

'I thought you thought about my hand.'

'Don't be surly, Richard.  And _you_ should never be stupid.  It is
your hand you touch them with.  Didn't you think of that?'

'No.  And I was stupid.  What would you like from that window?'

'I would like that small Negro with the ebony face and the turban made
of chip diamonds with the small ruby on the crown of the turban.  I
should wear it as a pin.  Everyone wore them in the old days in this
city and the faces were those of their confidential servants.  I have
coveted this for a long time, but I wanted you to give it to me.'

'I'll send it in the morning.'

'No.  Give it to me when we have lunch before you go.'

'Right,' the Colonel said.

'Now we must walk or we will be too late for dinner.'

They started to walk, arm through arm, and as they went up the first
bridge the wind lashed at them.

When the twinge came, the Colonel said to himself, the hell with that.

'Richard,' the girl said.  'Put your hand in your pocket to please me
and feel them.'

The Colonel did.

'They feel wonderful,' he said.




Chapter XI

They came in, out of the wind and the cold, through the main entrance
of the Gritti Palace Hotel, into the light and warmth of the lobby.

'Good evening, Contessa,' the concierge said.  'Good evening, my
Colonel.  It must be cold outside.'

'It is,' the Colonel said, and did not add any of the rough or obscene
phrases about the extent of the cold, or the force of the wind, that he
could ordinarily have employed, for their mutual pleasure when
speaking, alone, with the concierge.

As they entered the long hallway that led to the big stairs and to the
elevator, leaving, on your right, the entrance to the bar, the doorway
on to the Grand Canal, and the entrance to the dining-room, the _Gran
Maestro_ came out of the bar.

He was wearing a formal white jacket, cut long, and he smiled at them
and said, 'Good evening, my Countess.  Good evening, my Colonel.'

'_Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.

The _Gran Maestro_ smiled and, still bowing, said, 'We are dining in
the bar at the far end.  There is no one here now in the winter time
and the dining-room is too big.  I have saved your table.  We have a
very fine lobster if you would like him to commence with.'

'Is he really fresh?'

'I saw him this morning when he came from the market in a basket.  He
was alive and a dark green and completely unfriendly.'

'Would you like lobster, Daughter, to start your dinner?'

The Colonel was conscious of using the word, and so was the _Gran
Maestro_, and so was the girl.  But to each one it meant a different
thing.

'I wanted to have him for you in case any _pescecani_ came in.  They
are down now to gamble at the Lido.  I was not trying to sell him.'

'I would love some lobster,' the girl said.  'Cold, and with
mayonnaise.  The mayonnaise rather stiff.'  She said this in Italian.

'It isn't too expensive?' she said to the Colonel, seriously.

'_Ay hija mia_,' the Colonel said.

'Feel in your right pocket,' she said.

'I'll see that he is not too expensive,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'Or
I'll buy him myself.  I could get him quite easily with a week's wages.'

'Sold to TRUST,' the Colonel said, this being the code designation of
the task force occupying Trieste.  'He only costs me a day's wages.'

'Put your hand in your right hand pocket and feel very rich,' the girl
said.

The _Gran Maestro_ had sensed this was a private joke and had gone;
silently.  He was happy about the girl, whom he respected and admired,
and he was happy for his Colonel.

'I am rich,' the Colonel said.  'But if you tease me about them, I will
give them back, and on the linen tablecloth, and in public.'

He was teasing rough in his turn; throwing in the counter-attack
without even thinking.

'No, you won't,' she said.  'Because you love them already.'

'I would take anything I love and throw it off the highest cliff you
ever saw and not wait to hear it bounce.'

'No, you wouldn't,' the girl said.  'You would not throw me off any
high cliffs.'

'No,' the Colonel agreed.  'And forgive me for talking badly.'

'You didn't talk very badly and I didn't believe it anyway,' the girl
told him.  'Now should I go to the women's room to comb my hair and
make myself presentable, or should I come up to your room?'

'Which do you wish?'

'To come to your room, of course, and see how you live and how things
are there.'

'What about the hotel?'

'Everything is known in Venice anyway.  But it is also known who my
family are and that I am a good girl.  Also they know it is you and it
is I.  We have some credit to exhaust.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'By stairs or elevator?'

'By elevator,' she said, and he heard the change in her voice.  'You
can call a boy or we can run it ourselves.'

'We run it ourselves,' the Colonel said.  'I checked out on elevators
long ago.'

It was a good ride with a slight bump, and a rectification at the end,
and the Colonel thought: Checked out, eh?  You better be checked out
again.

The corridor was now not simply beautiful, but exciting, and putting
the key into the lock was not a simple process, but a rite.

'Here it is,' the Colonel said when he swung the door open.  'What
there is of it.'

'It is charming,' the girl said.  'But it is awfully cold with the
windows open.'

'I'll close them.'

'No, please.  Leave them open if you like it that way.'

The Colonel kissed her and felt her wonderful, long, young, lithe and
properly built body against his own body, which was hard and good, but
beat-up, and as he kissed her he thought of nothing.

They kissed for a long time, standing straight, and kissing true, in
the cold of the open windows that were on to the Grand Canal.

'Oh,' she said.  Then, 'Oh.'

'We owe nothing,' the Colonel said.  'Not a thing.'

'Will you marry me and will we have the five sons?'

'I will!  I will!'

'The thing is that, would you?'

'Of course.'

'Kiss me once again and make the buttons of your uniform hurt me but
not too much.'

They stood there and kissed each other true.  'I have a disappointment
for you, Richard,' she said.  'I have a disappointment about
everything.'

She said it as a flat statement and it came to the Colonel in the same
way as a message came from one of the three battalions, when the
battalion commander spoke the absolute truth and told you the worst.

'You are positive?'

'Yes.'

'My poor Daughter,' he said.

Now there was nothing dark about the word and she was his daughter,
truly, and he pitied her and loved her.

'No matter,' he said.  'You comb yourself and make a new mouth and all
that, and we will have a good dinner.'

'Say once more, first, that you love me and make the buttons very
tight.'

'I love you,' the Colonel said quite formally.

Then he whispered into her ear as gently as he knew how to whisper, as
his whisper was when they are fifteen feet away and you are a young
lieutenant on a patrol, 'I love you only, my best and last and only and
one true love.'

'Good,' she said, and kissed him hard so he could feel the sweet salt
of the blood inside his lip.  And I like that too, he thought.

'Now I will comb my hair and make my mouth new and you can watch me.'

'Do you want me to shut the windows?'

'No,' she said.  'We will do it all in the cold.'

'Who do you love?'

'You,' she said.  'And we don't have too much luck, do we?'

'I don't know,' the Colonel said.  'Go ahead and comb your hair.'

The Colonel went into the bathroom to wash up for dinner.  The bathroom
was the only disappointing part of the room.  Due to the exigencies of
the Gritti having been built as a palace, there had been no site for
bathrooms at the time of building, and, later, when they were
introduced, they had been built down the corridor and those entitled to
use them gave due warning beforehand and water was heated and towels
laid out.

This bathroom had been cut, arbitrarily, from a corner of the room and
it was a defensive, rather than an attacking bathroom, the Colonel
felt.  Washing, and forced to look in the mirror to check any traces of
lipstick, he regarded his face.

It looks as though it had been cut out of wood by an indifferent
craftsman, he thought.

He looked at the different welts and ridges that had come before they
had plastic surgery, and at the thin, only to be observed by the
initiate, lines of the excellent plastic operations after head wounds.

Well, that is what I have to offer as a _gueule_ or a _façade_, he
thought1 It is a damn poor offer.  The only thing is that it is tanned,
and that takes some of the curse off of it.  But, Christ what an ugly
man.

He did not notice the old used steel of his eyes nor the small long
extending laugh wrinkles at the corners of his eyes, nor that his
broken nose was like a gladiator's in the oldest statues.  Nor did he
notice his basically kind mouth which could be truly ruthless.

The hell with you, he said to the mirror.  You beat-up, miserable.
Should we rejoin the ladles?

He went out from the bathroom into the room, and he was as young as at
his first attack.  Every worthless thing had been left in the bathroom.
As always, he thought.  That's the place for it.

_Où sont les neiges d'antan?  Où sont les neiges d'autrefois?  Dans le
pissoir toute la chose comme ça._

The girl, whose first name was Renata, had the doors of the tall
armoire open.  They were all mirrored inside and she was combing her
hair.

She was not combing it for vanity, nor to do to the Colonel what she
knew it could and would do.  She was combing it with difficulty and
without respect, and, since it was very heavy hair and as alive as the
hair of peasants, or the hair of the beauties of the great nobility, it
was resistant to the comb.

'The wind made it very tangled,' she said.  'Do you love me still?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'May I help you?'

'No, I've done it all my life.'

'You could stand sidewise.'

'No.  All contours are for our five sons and for your head to rest on.'

'I was only thinking of the face,' the Colonel said.  'But thank you
for calling my attention.  My attention has been faulty again.'

'I am over bold.'

'No,' the Colonel said.  'In America, they make such things of wire and
of sponge-rubber, such as you use in the seats of tanks.  You never
know there, whether there is any truth in the matter, unless you are a
bad boy, as I am.'

'Here it is not that way,' she said, and, with the comb, swung her now
parted hair forward so that it came below the line of her cheek and,
slanting back, hung over her shoulders.

'Do you like it neat?'

'It's not too neat but it is damn lovely.'

'I could put it up and all that sort of thing if you value neatness.
But I cannot manage hairpins and it seems so silly.'  Her voice was so
lovely and it always reminded him of Pablo Casals playing the 'cello
that it made him feel as a wound does that you think you cannot bear.
But you can bear anything, he thought.

'I love you very much the way you are,' the Colonel said.  'And you are
the most beautiful woman I have ever known, or seen, ever in paintings
by good painters.'

'I wonder why the portrait has not come.'

'The portrait is lovely to have,' the Colonel said, and now he was a
General again without thinking of it.  'But it is like skinning a dead
horse.'

'Please don't be rough,' the girl said.  'I don't feel at all like
being rough to-night.'

'I slipped into the jargon of my _sale mètier_.'

'No,' she said.  'Please put your arms around me, gently and well.
Please.  It is not a dirty trade.  It is the oldest and the best,
although most people who practise it are unworthy.'

He held her as tight as he could without hurting and she said, 'I would
not have you be a lawyer nor a priest.  Nor sell things.  Nor be a
great success.  I love you to be in your trade and I love you.  Please
whisper to me if you wish.'

The Colonel whispered; holding her tight, and with his heart broken,
honestly and fairly, in his whisper that was as barely audible as a
silent dog whistle heard close to the ear, 'I love you, devil.  And
you're my daughter, too.  And I don't care about our losses because the
moon is our mother and our father.  And now let's go down to dinner.'

He whispered this last so low that it was inaudible to anyone who did
not love you.

'Yes,' the girl said.  'Yes.  But kiss me once more first.'




Chapter XII

They were at their table in the far corner of the bar, where the
Colonel had both his flanks covered, and he rested solidly against the
corner of the room.  The _Gran Maestro_ knew about this, since he had
been an excellent sergeant in a good company of infantry, in a
first-rate regiment, and he would no more have seated his Colonel in
the middle of a room than he would have taken up a stupid defensive
position.

'The lobster,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

The lobster was imposing.  He was double the size a lobster should be,
and his unfriendliness had gone with the boiling, so that now he looked
a monument to his dead self; complete with protruding eyes and his
delicate, far-extended antennae that were for knowing what rather
stupid eyes could not tell him.

He looks a little bit like Georgie Patton, the Colonel thought.  But he
probably never cried in his life when he was moved.

'Do you think that he will be tough?' he asked the girl in Italian.

'No,' the _Gran Maestro_ assured them, still bowing with the lobster.
'He's truly not tough.  He's only big.  You know the type.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'Serve him.'

'And what will you drink?'

'What do you want, Daughter?'

'What you want?'

'Capri Bianco,' the Colonel said.  'Secco and really cold.'

'I have it ready,' said the _Gran Maestro_.

'We are having fun,' the girl said.  'We are having it again and
without sorrow.  Isn't he an imposing lobster?'

'He is,' the Colonel answered.  'And he better damn well be tender.'

'He will be,' the girl told him.  'The _Gran Maestro_ doesn't lie.
Isn't it wonderful to have people who do not lie?'

'Very wonderful and quite rare,' the Colonel said.  'I was thinking
just now of a man named Georgie Patton who possibly never told the
truth in his life.'

'Do you ever lie?'

'I've lied four times.  But each time I was very tired.  That's not an
excuse,' he added.

'I lied a lot when I was a little girl.  But mostly it was making up
stories.  Or I hope so.  But I have never lied to my own advantage.'

'I have,' said the Colonel.  'Four times.'

'Would you have been a general if you had not lied?'

'If I had lied as others lied, I would have been a three-star general.'

'Would it make you happier to be a three-star general?'

'No,' said the Colonel.  'It would not.'

'Put your right hand, your real hand, in your pocket once and tell me
how you feel.'

The Colonel did so.

'Wonderful,' he said.  'But I have to give them back you know.'

'No.  Please, no.'

'We won't go into it now.'

Just then the lobster was served.

It was tender, with the peculiar slippery grace of that kicking muscle
which is the tail, and the claws were excellent; neither too thin, nor
too fat.

'A lobster fills with the moon,' the Colonel told the girl.  'When the
moon is dark he is not worth eating.'

'I didn't know that.'

'I think it may be because, with the full moon, he feeds all night.  Or
maybe it is that the full moon brings him feed.'

'They come from the Dalmatian coast do they not?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'That's your rich coast in fish.  Maybe I
should say our rich coast.'

'Say it,' the girl said.  'You don't know how important things that are
said are.'

'They are a damn sight more important when you put them on paper.'

'No,' the girl said.  'I don't agree.  The paper means nothing unless
you say them in your heart.'

'And what if you haven't a heart, or your heart is worthless?'

'You have a heart and it is not worthless.'

I would sure as hell like to trade it in on a new one, the Colonel
thought.  I do not see why that one, of all the muscles, should fail
me.  But he said nothing of this, and put his hand in his pocket.

'They feel wonderful,' he said.  'And you look wonderful.'

'Thank you,' she said.  'I will remember that all week.'

'You could always just look in the glass.'

'The mirror bores me,' she said.  'Putting on lipstick and moving your
lips over each other to get it spread properly and combing your too
heavy hair is not a life for a woman, or even a girl alone, who loves
someone.  When you want to be the moon and various stars and live with
your man and have five sons, looking at yourself in the mirror and
doing the artifices of a woman is not very exciting.'

'Then let us be married at once.'

'No,' she said.  'I had to make a decision about that, as about the
other different things.  All week long is my time to make decisions.'

'I make them, too,' the Colonel told her.  'But I am very vulnerable on
this.'

'Let's not talk about it.  It makes a sweet hurt, but I think we would
do better to find out what the _Gran Maestro_ has for meat.  Please
drink your wine.  You haven't touched it.'

'I'll touch it now,' the Colonel said.  He did and it was pale and cold
like the wines of Greece, but not resinous, and its body was as full
and as lovely as that of Renata.

'It's very like you.'

'Yes.  I know.  That's why I wanted you to taste it.'

'I'm tasting it,' the Colonel said.  'Now I will drink a full glass.'

'You're a good man.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.  'I'll remember that all week and try to
be one.'  Then he said, '_Gran Maestro_.'

When the _Gran Maestro_ came over, happy, conspiratorial, and ignoring
his ulcers, the Colonel asked him, 'What sort of meat have you that is
worth our eating?'

'I'm not quite sure I know,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But I will
check.  Your compatriot is over there in hearing distance.  He would
not let me seat him in the far corner.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'We'll give him something to write about.'

'He writes every night, you know.  I've heard that from one of my
colleagues at his hotel.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'That shows that he is industrious even if
he has outlived his talents.'

'We are all industrious,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

'In different ways.'

'I will go and check on what there actually is among the meats.'

'Check carefully.'

'I am industrious.'

'You are also damn sagacious.'

The _Gran Maestro_ was gone and the girl said, 'He is a lovely man and
I love how fond he is of you.'

'We are good friends,' the Colonel said.  'I hope he has a good steak
for you.'

'There is one very good steak,' the _Gran Maestro_ said, reappearing.

'You take it, Daughter.  I get them all the time at the mess.  Do you
want it rare?'

'Quite rare, please.'

'_Al sangue_,' the Colonel said, 'as John said when he spoke to the
waiter in French.  _Crudo, bleu_, or just make it very rare.'

'It's rare,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'And you, my Colonel?'

'The scaloppine with Marsala, and the cauliflower braised with butter.
Plus an artichoke vinaigrette if you can find one.  What do you want,
Daughter?'

'Mashed potatoes and a plain salad.'

'You're a growing girl.'

'Yes.  But I should not grow too much nor in the wrong directions.'

'I think that handles it,' the Colonel said.  'What about a fiasco of
Valpolicella?'

'We don't have fiascos.  This is a good hotel, you know.  It comes in
bottles.'

'I forgot,' the Colonel said.  'Do you remember when it cost thirty
centesimi the litre?'

'And we would throw the empty fiascos at the station guards from the
troop trains?'

'And we would throw all the left over grenades away and bounce them
down the hillside coming back from the Grappa?'

'And they would think there was a break-through when they would see the
bursts and you never shaved, and we wore the _fiamme nere_ on the grey,
open jackets with the grey sweaters?'

'And I drank grappa and could not even feel the taste?'

'We must have been tough then,' the Colonel said.

'We were tough then,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'We were bad boys then,
and you were the worst of the bad boys.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I think we were rather bad boys.  You
forgive this will you, Daughter?'

'You haven't a picture of then, have you?'

'No.  There weren't any pictures except with Mr. d'Annunzio in them.
Also most of the people turned out badly.'

'Except for us,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'Now I must go and see how
the steak marches.'

The Colonel, who was a sub-lieutenant again now, riding in a camion,
his face dust, until only his metallic eyes showed, and they were
red-rimmed and sore, sat thinking.

The three key points, he thought.  The massif of Grappa with Assalone
and Pertica and the hill I do not remember the name of on the right.
That was where I grew up, he thought, and all the nights I woke
sweating, dreaming I would not be able to get them out of the trucks.
They should not have gotten out, ever, of course.  But what a trade it
is.

'In our army, you know,' he told the girl, 'practically no generals
have ever fought.  It is quite strange and the top organization
dislikes those who have fought.'

'Do generals really fight?'

'Oh, yes.  When they are captains and lieutenants.  Later, except in
retreats, it is rather stupid.'

'Did you fight much?  I know you did.  But tell me.'

'I fought enough to be classified as a fool by the great thinkers.'

'Tell me.'

'When I was a boy, I fought against Erwin Rommel half way from Cortina
to the Grappa, where we held.  He was a captain then and I was an
acting captain; really a sub-lieutenant.'

'Did you know him?'

'No.  Not until after the war when we could talk together.  He was very
nice and I liked him.  We used to ski together.'

'Did you like many Germans?'

'Very many.  Ernst Udet I liked the best.'

'But they were in the wrong.'

'Of course.  But who has not been?'

'I never could like them or take such a tolerant attitude as you do,
since they killed my father and burned our villa on the Brenta and the
day I saw a German officer shooting pigeons with a shotgun in the
Piazzo San Marco.'

'I understand,' the Colonel said.  'But please, Daughter, you try to
understand my attitude too.  When we have killed so many we can afford
to be kind.'

'How many have you killed?'

'One hundred and twenty-two sures.  Not counting possibles.'

'You had no remorse?'

'Never.'

'Nor bad dreams about it?'

'Nor bad dreams.  But usually strange ones.  Combat dreams, always, for
a while after combat.  But then strange dreams about places mostly.  We
live by accidents of terrain, you know.  And terrain is what remains in
the dreaming part of your mind.'

'Don't you ever dream about me?'

'I try to.  But I can't.'

'Maybe the portrait will help.'

'I hope so,' the Colonel said.  'Please don't forget to remind me to
give back the stones.'

'Please don't be cruel.'

'I have my small necessities of honour in the same proportions as we
have our great and enveloping love.  You cannot have the one without
the other.'

'But you could give me privileges.'

'You have them,' the Colonel said.  'The stones are in my pocket.'

The _Gran Maestro_ came then with the steak and the scaloppine and the
vegetables.  They were brought by a sleek-headed boy who believed in
nothing; but was trying hard to be a good second waiter.  He was a
member of the Order.  The _Gran Maestro_ served adroitly and with
respect both for the food, and those that were to eat it.

'Now eat,' he said.

'Uncork that Valpolicella,' he said to the boy who had the eyes of an
unbelieving spaniel.

'What do you have on that character?' the Colonel asked him, referring
to his pitted compatriot, sitting chawing at his food, while the
elderly woman with him ate with suburban grace.

'You should tell me.  Not me you.'

'I never saw him before to-day,' the Colonel said.  'He's hard to take
with food.'

'He condescends to me.  He speaks bad Italian assiduously.  He goes
everywhere in Baedeker, and he has no taste in either food or wine.
The woman is nice.  I believe she is his aunt.  But I have no real
information.'

'He looks like something we could do without.'

'I believe we could.  In a pinch.'

'Does he speak of us?'

'He asked me who you were.  He was familiar with the Contessa's name
and had book-visited several palaces that had belonged to the family.
He was impressed by your name, Madam, which I gave to impress him.'

'Do you think he will put us in a book?'

'I'm sure of it.  He puts everything in a book.'

'We ought to be in a book,' the Colonel said.  'Would you mind,
Daughter?'

'Of course not,' the girl said.  'But I'd rather Dante wrote it.'

'Dante isn't around,' the Colonel said.

'Can you tell me anything about the war?' the girl asked.  'Anything
that I should be permitted to know?'

'Sure.  Anything you like.'

'What was General Eisenhower like?'

'Strictly the Epworth League.  Probably that is unjust too.  Also
complicated by various other influences.  An excellent politician.
Political General.  Very able at it.'

'The other leaders?'

'Let us not name them.  They've named themselves enough in their
memoirs.  Mostly extremely plausible out of something called the Rotary
Club that you would never have heard of.  In this club, they have
enamelled buttons with their first names and you are fined if you call
them by their proper names.  Never fought.  Ever.'

'Were there no good ones?'

'Yes, many.  Bradley, the schoolmaster, and many others.  Give you
Lightning Joe as a good one.  Very good.'

'Who was he?'

'Commanded the Seventh Corps when I was there.  Very sound.  Rapid.
Accurate.  Now chief of staff.'

'But what about the great leaders we heard about like the Generals
Montgomery and Patton?'

'Forget them, Daughter.  Monty was a character who needed fifteen to
one to move, and then moved tardily.'

'I always supposed he was a great General.'

'He was not,' the Colonel said.  'The worst part was he knew it.  I
have seen him come into an hotel and change from his proper uniform
into a crowd-catching kit to go out in the evening to animate the
populace.'

'Do you dislike him?'

'No.  I simply think he is a British General.  Whatever that means.
And don't you use the term.'

'But he beat General Rommel.'

'Yes.  And you don't think anyone else had softened him up?  And who
can't win with fifteen to one?  When we fought here, when we were boys,
the _Gran Maestro_ and I, we won for one whole year with three to four
against one and we won each one.  Three main bad ones.  That is why we
can make jokes and not be solemn.  We had something over one hundred
and forty thousand dead that year.  That is why we can speak gaily and
without pomposity.'

'It is such a sad science; if it is a science,' the girl said.  'I hate
the war monuments, though I respect them.'

'I do not like them either.  Nor the process which led to their
construction.  Have you ever seen that end of the thing?'

'No.  But I would like to know.'

'Better not know,' the Colonel said.  'Eat your steak before it gets
cold and forgive me for talking about my trade.'

'I hate it but I love it.'

'I believe we share the same emotions,' the Colonel said.  'But what is
my pitted compatriot thinking three tables down?'

'About his next book, or about what it says in Baedeker.'

'Should we go and ride in a gondola in the wind after we have dined?'

'That would be lovely.'

'Should we tell the pitted man that we are going?  I think he has the
same pits on his heart and in his soul and maybe in his curiosity.'

'We tell him nothing,' the girl said.  'The _Gran Maestro_ can convey
him any information we wish.'

Then she chewed well and solidly on her steak and said, 'Do you think
it is true that men make their own faces after fifty.'

'I hope not.  Because I would not sign for mine.'

'You,' she said.  'You.'

'Is the steak good?' the Colonel asked.

'It's wonderful.  How are your scaloppine?'

'Very tender and the sauce is not at all sweet.  Do you like the
vegetables?'

'The cauliflower is almost crisp; like celery.'

'We should have some celery.  But I don't think there is any or the
_Gran Maestro_ would have brought it.'

'Don't we have fun with food?  Imagine if we could eat together always.'

'I've suggested it.'

'Let's not talk about that.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'I've made a decision too.  I'm going
to chuck the army and live in this town, very simply, on my retirement
pay.'

'That's wonderful.  How do you look in civilian clothes?'

'You've seen me.'

'I know it, my dear.  I said it for a joke.  You make rough jokes
sometimes too, you know.'

'I'll look all right.  That is if you have a tailor here who can cut
clothes.'

'There isn't one here, but there is in Rome.  Can we drive together to
Rome to get the clothes?'

'Yes.  And we will live outside the town at Viterbo and only go in for
the fittings and for dinner in the evening.  Then we'll drive back in
the night.'

'Will we see cinema people and speak about them with candour and
perhaps not have a drink with them?'

'We'll see them by the thousands.'

'Will we see them being married for the second and third time and then
being blessed by the Pope?'

'If you go in for that kind of thing.'

'I don't,' the girl said.  'That's one reason that I cannot marry you.'

'I see,' the Colonel said.  'Thank you.'

'But I will love you, whatever that means, and you and I know what it
means very well, as long as either of us is alive and after.'

'I don't think you can love very much after you, yourself, are dead,'
the Colonel said.

He started to eat the artichoke taking a leaf at a time, and dipping
them, heavy side down, into the deep saucer of _sauce vinaigrette_.

'I don't know whether you can either,' the girl said.  'But I will try.
Don't you feel better to be loved?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I feel as though I were out on some
bare-assed hill where it was too rocky to dig, and the rocks all solid,
but with nothing jutting, and no bulges, and all of a sudden instead of
being there naked, I was armoured.  Armoured and the eighty-eights not
there.'

'You should tell that to our writer friend with the craters of the moon
face so he could write it to-night.'

'I ought to tell it to Dante if he was around,' the Colonel, suddenly
gone as rough as the sea when a line squall comes up, said.  'I'd tell
him what I'd do if I were shifted, or ascended, into an armoured
vehicle under such circumstances.'

Just then the Barone Alvarito came into the dining-room.  He was
looking for them and, being a hunter, he saw them instantly.

He came over to the table and kissed Renata's hand, saying, 'Ciao,
Renata.'  He was almost tall, beautifully built in his town clothes,
and he was the shyest man the Colonel had ever known.  He was not shy
from ignorance, nor from being ill at ease, nor from any defect.  He
was basically shy, as certain animals are, such as the Bongo that you
will never see in the jungle, and that must be hunted with dogs.

'My Colonel,' he said.  He smiled as only the truly shy can smile.

It was not the easy grin of the confident, nor the quick slashing smile
of the extremely durable and the wicked.  It had no relation with the
poised, intently used smile of the courtesan or the politician.  It was
the strange, rare smile which rises from the deep, dark pit, deeper
than a well, deep as a deep mine, that is within them.

'I can only stay a moment.  I came to tell you that it looks quite good
for the shoot.  The ducks are coming in heavily from the north.  There
are many big ducks.  The ones you like,' he smiled again.

'Sit down, Alvarito.  Please.'

'No,' the Barone Alvarito said.  'We can meet at the garage at
two-thirty if you like?  You have your car?'

'Yes.'

'That makes it very good.  Leaving at that hour, we will have time to
see the ducks in the evening.'

'Splendid,' the Colonel said.

'Ciao, then, Renata.  Good-bye, my Colonel.  Until two-thirty.'

'We knew each other as children,' the girl said.  'But he was about
three years older.  He was born very old.'

'Yes.  I know.  He is a good friend of mine.'

'Do you think your compatriot has looked him up in Baedeker?'

'I wouldn't know,' the Colonel said.  '_Gran Maestro_,' he asked, 'did
my illustrious compatriot look up the _Barone_ in Baedeker?'

'Truly, my Colonel.  I have not seen him pull his Baedeker during the
meal.'

'Give him full marks,' the Colonel said.  'Now look.  I believe that
the Valpolicella is better when it is newer.  It is not a _grand vin_
and bottling it and putting years on it only adds sediment.  Do you
agree?'

'I agree.'

'Then what should we do?'

'My Colonel, you know that in a Great Hotel, wine must cost money.  You
cannot get Pinard at the Ritz.  But I suggest that we get several
fiascos of the good.  You can say they come from the Contessa Renata's
estates and are a gift.  Then I will have them decanted for you.  This
way, we will have better wine and make an impressive saving.  I will
explain it to the manager if you like.  He is a very good man.'

'Explain it to him,' the Colonel said.  'He's not a man who drinks
labels either.'

'Agreed.'

'In the meantime you might as well drink this.  It is very good you
know.'

'It is,' the Colonel said.  'But it isn't Chambertin.'

'What did we use to drink?'

'Anything,' the Colonel said.  'But now I seek perfection.  Or, rather,
not absolute perfection, but perfection for my money.'

'I seek it, too,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But rather vainly.'

'What do you want for the end of the meal?'

'Cheese,' the Colonel said.  'What do you want, Daughter?'

The girl had been quiet and a little withdrawn, since she had seen
Alvarito.  Something was going on in her mind, and it was an excellent
mind.  But, momentarily, she was not with them.

'Cheese,' she said.  'Please.'

'What cheese?'

'Bring them all and we'll look at them,' the Colonel said.

The _Gran Maestro_ left and the Colonel said, 'What's the matter,
Daughter?'

'Nothing.  Never anything.  Always nothing.'

'You might as well pull out of it.  We haven't time for such luxuries.'

'No.  I agree.  We will devote ourselves to the cheese.'

'Do I have to take it like a corn cob?'

'No,' she said, not understanding the colloquialism, but understanding
exactly what was meant, since it was she who had been doing the
thinking.  'Put your right hand in your pocket.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'I will.'

He put his right hand in his pocket and felt what was there, first with
the tips of his fingers, and then with the insides of his fingers, and
then with the palm of his hand; his split hand.

'I'm sorry,' she said.  'And now we begin the good part of it again.
We will dedicate ourselves to the cheese with happiness.'

'Excellent,' the Colonel said.  'I wonder what cheeses he has?'

'Tell me about the last war,' the girl said.  'Then we will ride in our
gondola in the cold wind.'

'It was not very interesting,' the Colonel said.  'To us, of course,
such things are always interesting.  But there were only three, maybe
four, phases that really interested me.'

'Why?'

'We were fighting a beaten enemy whose communications had been
destroyed.  We destroyed many divisions on paper, but they were ghost
divisions.  Not real ones.  They had been destroyed by our tactical
aviation before they ever got up.  It was only really difficult in
Normandy, due to the terrain, and when we made the break for Georgie
Patton's armour to go through and held it open on both sides.'

'How do you make a break for armour to go through?  Tell me, please.'

'First you fight to take a town that controls all the main roads.  Call
the town St. Lo.  Then you have to open up the roads by taking other
towns and villages.  The enemy has a main line of resistance, but he
cannot bring up his divisions to counter-attack because the
fighter-bombers catch them on the roads.  Does this bore you?  It bores
the hell out of me.'

'It does not bore me.  I never heard it said understandably before.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.  'Are you sure you want more of the sad
science?'

'Please,' she said.  'I love you, you know, and I would like to share
it with you.'

'Nobody shares this trade with anybody,' the Colonel told her.  'I'm
just telling you how it works.  I can insert anecdotes to make it
interesting, or plausible.'

'Insert some, please.'

'The taking of Paris was nothing,' the Colonel said.  'It was only an
emotional experience.  Not a military operation.  We killed a number of
typists and the screen the Germans had left, as they always do, to
cover their withdrawal.  I suppose they figured they were not going to
need a hell of a lot of office workers any more and they left them as
soldiers.'

'Was it not a great thing?'

'The people of Leclerc, another jerk of the third or fourth water,
whose death I celebrated with a magnum of Perrier-Jouet Brut 1942, shot
a great number of rounds to make it seem important and because we had
given them what they had to shoot with.  But it was not important.'

'Did you take part in it?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I think I could safely say, yes.'

'Did you have no great impressions of it?  After all, it was Paris and
not everyone has taken it.'

'The French, themselves, had taken it four days before.  But the grand
plan of what we called SHAEF, Supreme, get that word, Headquarters of
the Allied Expeditionary Forces, which included all the military
politicians of the rear, and who wore a badge of shame in the form of a
flaming something, while we wore a four-leafed clover as a designation,
and for luck, had a master plan for the envelopment of the city.  So we
could not simply take it.

'Also we had to wait for the possible arrival of General or Field
Marshal Bernard Law Montgomery who was unable to close, even, the gap
at Falaise and found the going rather sticky and could not quite get
there on time.'

'You must have missed him,' the girl said.

'Oh, we did,' the Colonel said.  'No end.'

'But was there nothing noble or truly happy about it?'

'Surely,' the Colonel told her.  'We fought from Bas Meudon, and then
the Porte de Saint Cloud, through streets I knew and loved and we had
no deads and did as little damage as possible.  At the Etoile I took
Elsa Maxwell's butler prisoner.  It was a very complicated operation.
He had been denounced as a Japanese sniper.  A new thing.  Several
Parisians were alleged to have been killed by him.  So we sent three
men to the roof where he had taken refuge and he was an Indo-China boy.'

'I begin to understand a little.  But it is disheartening.'

'It is always disheartening as hell.  But you are not supposed to have
a heart in this trade.'

'But do you think it was the same in the time of the Grand Captains?'

'I am quite sure it was worse.'

'But you got your hand honourably?'

'Yes.  Very honourably.  On a rocky, bare-assed hill.'

'Please let me feel it,' she said.

'Just be careful around the centre,' the Colonel said.  'It's split
there and it still cracks open.'

'You ought to write,' the girl said.  'I mean it truly.  So someone
would know about such things.'

'No,' the Colonel disagreed.  'I have not the talent for it and I know
too much.  Almost any liar writes more convincingly than a man who was
there.'

'But other soldiers wrote.'

'Yes.  Maurice de Saxe.  Frederick the Great.  Mr. T'sun Su.'

'But soldiers of our time.'

'You use the word our with facility.  I like it though.'

'But didn't many modern soldiers write?'

'Many.  But did you ever read them?'

'No.  I have read mostly the classics and I read the illustrated papers
for the scandals.  Also, I read your letters.'

'Burn them,' the Colonel said.  'They are worthless.'

'Please.  Don't be rough.'

'I won't.  What can I tell you that won't bore you?'

'Tell me about when you were a General.'

'Oh, that,' he said and motioned to the _Gran Maestro_ to bring
champagne.  It was Roederer Brut '42 and he loved it.

'When you are a General you live in a trailer and your Chief of Staff
lives in a trailer, and you have bourbon whisky when other people do
not have it.  Your Gs live in the C.P.  I'd tell you what Gs are, but
it would bore you.  I'd tell you about G1, G2, G3, G4, G5 and on the
other side there is always Kraut-6.  But it would bore you.  On the
other hand, you have a map covered with plastic material, and on this
you have three regiments composed of three battalions each.  It is all
marked in coloured pencil.

'You have boundary lines so that when the battalions cross their
boundaries they will not then fight each other.  Each battalion is
composed of five companies.  All should be good, but some are good, and
some are not so good.  Also you have divisional artillery and a
battalion of tanks and many spare parts.  You live by co-ordinates.'

He paused while the _Gran Maestro_ poured the Roederer Brut '42.

'From Corps,' he translated, unlovingly, _cuerpo d'Armata_, 'they tell
you what you must do, and then you decide how to do it.  You dictate
the orders or, most often, you give them by telephone.  You ream out
people you respect, to make them do what you know is fairly impossible,
but is ordered.  Also, you have to think hard, stay awake late and get
up early.'

'And you won't write about this?  Not even to please me?'

'No,' said the Colonel.  'Boys who were sensitive and cracked and kept
all their valid first impressions of their day of battle, or their
three days, or even their four, write books.  They are good books but
can be dull if you have been there.  Then others write to profit
quickly from the war they never fought in.  The ones who ran back to
tell the news.  The news is hardly exact.  But they ran quickly with
it.  Professional writers who had jobs that prevented them from
fighting wrote of combat that they could not understand, as though they
had been there.  I do not know what category of sin that comes under.

'Also a nylon-smooth captain of the Navy who could not command a
cat-boat wrote about the intimate side of the truly Big Picture.
Everybody will write their book sooner or later.  We might even draw a
good one.  But I don't write, Daughter.'

He motioned for the _Gran Maestro_ to fill the glasses.

'_Gran Maestro_,' he said.  'Do you like to fight?'

'No.'

'But we fought?'

'Yes.  Too much.'

'How is your health?'

'Wonderful except for the ulcers and a small cardiac condition.'

'No,' the Colonel said, and his heart rose and he felt it choke him.
'You only told me about the ulcers.'

'Well, you know now,' the _Gran Maestro_ said and did not finish the
sentence and he smiled his best and clearest smile that came as solid
as the sun rises.

'How many times?'

The _Gran Maestro_ held up two fingers as a man might do giving odds
where he had credit, and all the betting was on the nod.

'I'm ahead of you,' the Colonel said.  'But let's not be macabre.  Ask
Donna Renata if she wishes more of this excellent wine.'

'You did not tell me there were more,' the girl said.  'You owe it to
me to tell me.'

'There has been nothing since we were together last.'

'Do you think it breaks for me?  If so, I would come and simply be with
you and care for you.'

'It's just a muscle,' the Colonel said.  'Only it is the main muscle.
It works as perfectly as a Rolex Oyster Perpetual.  The trouble is you
cannot send it to the Rolex representative when it goes wrong.  When it
stops, you just do not know the time.  You're dead.'

'Don't please talk about it.'

'You asked me,' the Colonel said.

'And that pitted man with the caricature face?  He has no such thing?'

'Of course not,' the Colonel told her.  'If he is a mediocre writer he
will live for ever.'

'But you're not a writer.  How do you know this?'

'No,' the Colonel said.  'By the grace of God.  But I've read several
books.  We have a lot of time to read when we are unmarried.  Not as
much as the merchant marine maybe.  But plenty.  I can tell one writer
from another and I tell you that a mediocre writer has a long span of
life.  They ought to all draw longevity pay.'

'Could you tell me any anecdotes, and we stop talking about this, which
is my true sorrow?'

'I can tell you hundreds of them.  All true.'

'Tell me just one.  Then we will finish this wine and then go in the
gondola.'

'Do you think you will be warm enough?'

'Oh, I'm sure I will.'

'I don't know what to tell you,' the Colonel said.  'Everything about
war bores those who have not made it.  Except the tales of the liars.'

'I would like to know about the taking of Paris.'

'Why?  Because I told you that you looked like Marie Antoinette in the
tumbril?'

'No.  I was complimented by that and I know we are a little alike in
profile.  But I have never been in any tumbril, and I would like to
hear about Paris.  When you love someone and he is your hero, you like
to hear about the places and the things.'

'Please turn your head,' the Colonel said, 'and I will tell you.  _Gran
Maestro_ is there any more in that wretched bottle?'

'No,' the _Gran Maestro_ answered.

'Then bring another.'

'I have one already iced.'

'Good.  Serve it.  Now, Daughter, we parted from the column of the
General Leclerc at Clamart.  They went to Montrouge and the Porte
d'Orleans and we went directly to Bas Meudon and secured the bridge of
the Porte de Saint Cloud.  Is this too technical and does it bore you?'

'No.'

'It would be better with a map.'

'Go on.'

'We secured the bridge and established a bridgehead on the other side
of the river and we threw the Germans, living and dead, who had
defended the bridge, into the Seine River,' he stopped.  'It was a
token defence of course.  They should have blown it.  We threw all
these Germans into the River Seine.  They were nearly all office
workers, I believe.'

'Go on.'

'The next morning, we were informed that the Germans had strong points
at various places, and artillery on Mount Valerien, and that tanks were
roaming the streets.  A portion of this was true.  We were also
requested not to enter too rapidly as the General Leclerc was to take
the city.  I complied with this request and entered as slowly as I
could.'

'How do you do that?'

'You hold up your attack two hours and you drink champagne whenever it
is offered to you by patriots, collaborators or enthusiasts.'

'But was there nothing wonderful nor great, the way it is in books?'

'Of course.  There was the city itself.  The people were very happy.
Old general officers were walking about in their moth-balled uniforms.
We were very happy, too, not to have to fight.'

'Did you not have to fight at all?'

'Only three times.  Then not seriously.'

'But was that all you had to fight to take such a city?'

'Daughter, we fought twelve times from Ranbouillet to enter the city.
But only two of them were worth describing as fights.  Those at Toussus
le Noble and at Le Buc.  The rest was the necessary garnishing of a
dish.  I really did not need to fight at all except at those two
places.'

'Tell me some true things about fighting.'

'Tell me you love me.'

'I love you,' the girl said.  'You can publish it in the _Gazzettina_
if you like.  I love your hard, flat body and your strange eyes that
frighten me when they become wicked.  I love your hand and all your
other wounded places.'

'I better try to tell you something pretty good,' the Colonel said.
'First I can tell you that I love you, Period.'

'Why don't you buy some good glass?' the girl asked, suddenly.  'We
could go to Murano together.'

'I don't know anything about glass.'

'I could teach you.  It would be fun.'

'We lead too nomadic a life for good glass.'

'But when you retire and live here.'

'We'll get some then.'

'I wish that that was now.'

'So do I, except that I go duck shooting to-morrow and that to-night is
to-night.'

'Can I come duck shooting?'

'Only if Alvarito asks you.'

'I can make him ask me.'

'I doubt that.'

'It isn't polite to doubt what your daughter says when she is old
enough not to lie.'

'All right, Daughter.  I withdraw the doubt.'

'Thank you.  For that I will not go and be a nuisance.  I will stay in
Venice and go to Mass with Mother and my aunt and my great-aunt and
visit my poors.  I am an only child so I have many duties.'

'I always wondered what you did.'

'That's what I do.  Also, I'll have my maid wash my head and give me a
manicure and a pedicure.'

'You can't do that because the shoot is on Sunday.'

'Then I'll do that on Monday.  On Sunday, I will read all the
illustrated papers including the outrageous ones.'

'Maybe they'll have pictures of Miss Bergman.  Do you still want to be
like her?'

'Not any more,' the girl said.  'I want to be like me only much, much
better and I want to have you love me.'

'Also,' she said suddenly and un-maskingly, 'I want to be like you.
Can I be like you a little while to-night?'

'Of course,' the Colonel said.  'In what town are we anyway?'

'Venice,' she said.  'The best town, I think.'

'I quite agree.  And thank you for not asking me for more war episodes.'

'Oh, you are going to have to tell them to me later.'

'_Have to_?' the Colonel said, and the cruelty and resolution showed in
his strange eyes as clearly as when the hooded muzzle of the gun of a
tank swings towards you.

'Did you say _have to_, Daughter?'

'I said it.  But I did not mean it in that way.  Or, if I did wrong, I
am sorry.  I meant will you please tell me more true episodes later?
And explain me the things I do not understand?'

'You can use _have to_ if you want, Daughter.  The hell with it.'

He smiled and his eyes were as kind as they ever were, which was not
too kind, as he knew.  But there was nothing now that he could do about
it except to try to be kind to his last and true and only love.

'I don't really mind, Daughter.  Please believe me.  I know about
command and, at your age, I used to take considerable pleasure in
exercising it.'

'But I don't want to command,' the girl said.  In spite of her
resolution not to cry, her eyes were wet.  'I wish to serve you.'

'I know.  But you wish to command, too.  There's nothing wrong in that.
All people such as us have it.'

'Thank you for the such as us.'

'It wasn't hard to say,' the Colonel said.  'Daughter,' he added.

Just then the concierge came to the table and said, 'Excuse me, my
Colonel.  There is a man outside, I believe he is a servant of yours,
my lady, with quite a large package which he says is for the Colonel.
Should I keep it in the storeroom or have it sent to your room?'

'To my room,' the Colonel said.

'Please,' the girl said.  'Can't we look at it here?  We don't care
about anyone here, do we?'

'Have it unwrapped and brought in here.'

'Very good.'

'Later, you may have it taken with great care to my room and have it
wrapped, solidly, for transport at noon to-morrow.'

'Very good, my Colonel.'

'Are you excited to see it?' the girl asked.

'Very,' said the Colonel.  '_Gran Maestro_, some more of that Roederer,
please, and please place a chair in such a position that we may view a
portrait.  We are devotees of the pictorial arts.'

'There's no more Roederer cold,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But if you
would like some Perrier-Jouet----'

'Bring it,' the Colonel said and added, 'Please.'

'I don't talk like Georgie Patton,' the Colonel told her.  'I don't
have to.  And besides he's dead.'

'Poor man.'

'Yes.  Poor man all his life.  Although quite rich in money and with a
lot of armour.'

'Do you have anything against armour?'

'Yes.  Most of the people inside of it.  It makes men into bullies
which is the first step towards cowardice; true cowardice, I mean.
Perhaps it is a little complicated by claustrophobia.'

Then he looked at her and smiled and regretted taking her beyond her
depth, as you might take a new swimmer on a shallow, shelving beach,
into too deep water; and he sought to reassure her.

'You forgive me, Daughter.  Much of what I say is unjust.  But it is
truer than the things that you will read in Generals' memoirs.  After a
man gets one star, or more, the truth becomes as difficult for him to
attain as the Holy Grail was in our ancestors' time.'

'But you were a general officer.'

'Not for too damn long,' the Colonel said.  'Now captains,' the General
said, 'they know the exact truth and they can mostly tell it to you.
If they can't, you reclassify them.'

'Would you reclassify me if I lied?'

'It would depend on what you lied about.'

'I'm not going to lie about anything.  I don't want to be reclassified.
It sounds horrible.'

'It is,' the Colonel said.  'And you send them back to have it done to
them with eleven different copies of why it should be done, every one
of which you sign.'

'Did you reclassify many?'

'Plenty.'

The concierge came into the room with the portrait, carrying it in its
big frame, much as a ship moves when she is carrying too much sail.

'Get two chairs,' the Colonel said to the second waiter, 'and put them
there.  See that the canvas does not touch the chairs.  And hold it so
it does not slip.'

Then to the girl he said, 'We'll have to change that frame.'

'I know,' she said.  'It was not my choice.  Take it unframed with you
and we'll choose a good frame next week.  Now look at it.  Not at the
frame.  At what it says, or does not say, of me.'

It was a beautiful portrait; neither cold, nor snobbish, nor stylized,
nor modern.  It was the way you would want your girl painted if
Tintoretto were still around and, if he were not around, you settled
for Velasquez.  It was not the way either of them painted.  It was
simply a splendid portrait painted, as they sometimes are, in our time.

'It's wonderful,' the Colonel said.  'It is truly lovely.'

The concierge and the second waiter were holding it and looking at it
around the edges.  The _Gran Maestro_ was admiring fully.  The
American, two tables down, was looking at it with his journalistic
eyes, wondering who painted it.  The back of the canvas was to the
other diners.

'It is wonderful,' the Colonel said.  'But you can't give me that.'

'I already have,' the girl said.  'I'm sure my hair was never that long
over my shoulders.'

'I think it probably was.'

'I could try to let it get that long if you want.'

'Try,' the Colonel said.  'You great beauty you.  I love you very much.
You and you portrayed on canvas.'

'Tell the waiters if you like.  I'm sure it won't come as a great shock
to them.'

'Take the canvas upstairs to my room,' the Colonel said to the
concierge.  'Thank you very much for bringing it in.  If the price is
right, I am going to buy it.'

'The price is right,' the girl said to him.  'Should we have them take
it and the chairs down and make a special showing of it for your
compatriot?  The _Gran Maestro_ could tell him the address of the
painter and he could visit the picturesque studio.'

'It is a very lovely portrait,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But it
should be taken to the room.  One should never let Roederer or
Perrier-Jouet do the talking.'

'Take it to the room, please.'

'You said please without a pause before it.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.  'I am very deeply moved by the portrait
and I am not entirely responsible for what I say.'

'Let's neither of us be responsible.'

'Agreed,' the Colonel said.  'The _Gran Maestro_ is really very
responsible.  He always was.'

'No,' the girl said.  'I think he did not only from responsibility but
from malice.  We all have malice, you know, of some kind or another in
this town.  I think perhaps he did not want the man to have even a
journalist's look into happiness.'

'Whatever that is.'

'I learned that phrase from you and now you have re-learned it back
from me.'

'That's the way it goes,' the Colonel said.  'What you win in Boston
you lose in Chicago.'

'I don't understand that at all.'

'Too hard to explain,' the Colonel said.  Then, 'No.  Of course it
isn't.  Making things clear is my main trade.  The hell with being too
hard to explain.  It is like professional football, _calcio_.  What you
win in Milano you lose in Torino.'

'I don't care about football.'

'Neither do I,' the Colonel said.  'Especially not about the Army and
Navy game and when the very high brass speaks in terms of American
football so they can understand, themselves, what they are talking of.'

'I think we will have a good time to-night.  Even under the
circumstances, whatever they are.'

'Should we take this new bottle in the gondola?'

'Yes,' the girl said.  'But with deep glasses.  I'll tell the _Gran
Maestro_.  Let's get our coats and go.'

'Good.  I'll take some of this medicine and sign for the G.M. and we'll
go.'

'I wish it was me taking the medicine instead of you.'

'I'm glad as hell it isn't,' the Colonel said.  'Should we pick our
gondola or have them bring one to the landing?'

'Let's gamble and have them bring one to the landing.  What do we have
to lose?'

'Nothing, I guess.  Probably nothing.'




Chapter XIII

They went out the side door of the hotel to the _imbarcadero_ and the
wind hit them.  The light from the hotel shone on the blackness of the
gondola and made the water green.  She looks as lovely as a good horse
or as a racing shell, the Colonel thought.  Why have I never seen a
gondola before?  What hand or eye framed that darked symmetry?

'Where should we go?' the girl asked.

Her hair, in the light from the hotel door and window, as she stood on
the dock by the black gondola, was blowing back in the wind, so she
looked like the figure-head on a ship.  The rest of it, too, the
Colonel thought.

'Let's just ride through the park,' the Colonel said.  'Or through the
Bois with the top down.  Let him take us out to Armenonville.'

'Will we go to Paris?'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'Tell him to take us for an hour where the
going is easiest.  I don't want to drive him into that wind.'

'The tide is quite high with this wind,' the girl said.  'Some of our
places he couldn't get under the bridges.  May I tell him where to go?'

'Of course, Daughter.'

'Stow that ice bucket aboard,' the Colonel said to the second waiter,
who had come out with them.

'The _Gran Maestro_ said to tell you, as you embarked, that this bottle
of wine was his present.'

'Thank him properly and tell him he can't do that.'

'He had better go into the wind a little first,' the girl said.  'Then
I know how he should go.'

'The _Gran Maestro_ sent this,' the second waiter said.

It was a folded, old U.S.O.D. blanket.  Renata was talking to the
gondoliere, her hair blowing.  The gondoliere wore a heavy blue navy
sweater and he was bare-headed too.

'Thank him,' the Colonel said.

He slipped a bill into the second waiter's hand.  The second waiter
returned it.  'You already made the notation on the check.  Neither you
nor I nor the _Gran Maestro_ are starving.'

'What about the moglie and the bambini?'

'I don't have that.  Your mediums smacked our house in Treviso.'

'I'm sorry.'

'You needn't be,' the second waiter said.  'You were a foot soldier as
I was.'

'Permit me to be sorry.'

'Sure,' the second waiter said.  'And what the hell difference does it
make?  Be happy, my Colonel and be happy, my Lady.'

They got down into the gondola and there was the same magic, as always,
of the light hull and the sudden displacement that you made and then
the trimming in the dark privacy and then the second trimming, as the
gondoliere started to scull, laying her partly on her side so that he
would have more control.

'Now,' the girl said.  'We are in our home and I love you.  Please kiss
me and put all love into it.'

The Colonel held her close, with her head thrown back and kissed her
until there was nothing left of the kiss but desperation.

'I love you.'

'Whatever that means,' she interrupted.

'I love you and I know whatever that means.  The picture is lovely.
But there is no word for what you are.'

'Wild,' she said.  'Or careless or unkempt?'

'No.'

'The last was one of the first words I learned from my governess.  It
means you do not comb your hair enough.  Neglectful is when you do not
brush one hundred strokes at night.'

'I'm going to run my hand through it and make it unkempter still.'

'Your hurt hand?'

'Yes.'

'We're sitting on the wrong sides for that.  Change over.'

'Good.  That is a sensible order couched in simple language and easily
understood.'

It was fun moving over, trying not to disturb the balance of the
gondola, but having to trim again carefully.

'Now,' she said.  'But hold me tightly with the other arm.'

'You know just what you want?'

'I do indeed.  Is it un-maidenly?  I learned that word, too, from my
governess.'

'No,' he said.  'It's lovely.  Pull up the blanket good and feel that
wind.'

'It's from the high mountains.'

'Yes.  And beyond there it's from somewhere else.'

The Colonel heard the slap of the waves and he felt the wind come
sharply and the rough familiarity of the blanket and then he felt the
girl cold-warm and lovely and with upraised breasts that his left hand
coasted lightly over.  Then he ran his bad hand through her hair once,
twice and three times and then he kissed her and it was worse than
desperation.

'Please,' she said, from almost underneath the blanket.  'Let me kiss
now.'

'No,' he said.  'Me again.'

The wind was very cold and lashed their faces but under the blanket
there was no wind nor nothing; only his ruined hand that searched for
the island in the great river with the high steep banks.

'That's it,' she said.

He kissed her then and he searched for the island, finding it and
losing it and then finding it for good.  For good and for bad, he
thought and for good and for all.

'My darling,' he said.  'My well beloved.  Please.'

'No.  Just hold me very tight and hold the high ground, too.'

The Colonel said nothing, because he was assisting, or had made an act
of presence, at the only mystery that he believed in except the
occasional bravery of man.

'Please don't move,' the girl said.  'Then move a great amount.'

The Colonel, lying under the blanket in the wind, knowing it is only
what man does for woman that he retains; except what he does for his
fatherland or his motherland, however you get the reading, proceeded.

'Please, darling,' the girl said.  'I don't think I can stand it.'

'Don't think of anything.  Don't think of anything at all.'

'I'm not.'

'Don't think.'

'Oh please let's not talk.'

'Is it right?'

'You know.'

'You're sure.'

'Oh please not talk.  Please.'

Yes, he thought.  Please and please again.

She said nothing and neither did he, and when the great bird had flown
far out of the closed window of the gondola and was lost and gone,
neither of them said anything.  He held her head lightly with his good
arm and the other arm held the high ground now.

'Please put it where it should be,' she said.  'Your hand.'

'Should we?'

'No.  Just hold me tight and try to love me true.'

'I love you true,' he said and just then the gondola turned to the
left, quite sharply and the wind was on his right cheek and he said,
with his old eyes catching the outline of the Palace where they turned
and noting it, 'You're in the lee now, Daughter.'

'But it is too soon now.  Don't you know how a woman feels?'

'No.  Only what you tell me.'

'Thank you for the you.  But don't you really know?'

'No.  I never asked, I guess.'

'Guess now,' she said.  'And please wait until after we have gone under
the second bridge.'

'Take a glass of this,' the Colonel said, reaching accurately and well
for the champagne bucket with the ice and uncorking the bottle the Gran
Maestro had uncorked and then placed a common wine cork in.

'This is good for you, Daughter.  It is good for all the ills that all
of us have and for all sadness and indecision.'

'I have none of those,' she said, speaking grammatically as her
governess had taught her.  'I am just a woman, or a girl, or whatever
that is, doing whatever it is she should not do.  Let's do it again,
please, now I am in the lee.'

'Where is the island now and in what river?'

'You are making the discovery.  I am only the unknown country.'

'Not too unknown,' the Colonel said.

'Please don't be rude,' the girl said.  'And please attack gently and
with the same attack as before.'

'It's no attack,' the Colonel said.  'It is something else.'

'Whatever it is, whatever it is, while I'm still in the lee.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'Yes, now if you want, or will accept from
kindness.'

'Please, yes.'

She talks like a gentle cat, though the poor cats cannot speak, the
Colonel thought.  But then he stopped thinking and he did not think for
a long time.

The gondola now was in one of the secondary canals.  When it had turned
from the Grand Canal, the wind had swung it so the gondoliere had to
shift all his weight as ballast and the Colonel and the girl had
shifted too, under the blanket, with the wind getting under the edge of
the blanket; wildly.

They had not spoken for a long time and the Colonel had noted that the
gondola had only inches free in passing under the last bridge.

'How are you, Daughter?'

'I'm quite lovely.'

'Do you love me?'

'Please don't ask such silly things.'

'The tide is very high and we only just made that last bridge.'

'I think I know where we are going.  I was born here.'

'I've made mistakes in my home town,' the Colonel said.  'Being born
there isn't everything.'

'It is very much,' the girl said.  'You know that.  Please hold me very
tightly so we can be a part of each other for a little while.'

'We can try,' the Colonel said.

'Couldn't I be you?'

'That's awfully complicated.  We could try of course.'

'I'm you now,' she said.  'And I just took the city of Paris.'

'Jesus, Daughter,' he said.  'You've got an awful lot of problems on
your hands.  The next thing, they will parade the twenty-eighth
division through.'

'I don't care.'

'I do.'

'Were they not good?'

'Sure.  They had fine commanders, too.  But they were National Guard
and hard luck.  What you call a T.S. division.  Get your T.S. slip from
the chaplain.'

'I understand none of those things.'

'They aren't worth explaining,' the Colonel said.

'Will you tell me some true things about Paris?  I love it so much and
when I think of you taking it, then, it is as though I were riding in
this gondola with Marechal Ney.'

'A no good job,' the Colonel said.  'Anyway, not after he fought all
those rear-guard actions coming back from that big Russian town.  He
used to fight ten, twelve, fifteen times a day.  Maybe more.
Afterwards, he couldn't recognize people.  Please don't get in any
gondolas with him.'

'He was always one of my great heroes.'

'Yeah.  Mine too.  Until Quatre Bras.  Maybe it wasn't Quatre Bras.
I'm getting rusty.  Give it the generic title of Waterloo.'

'Was he bad there?'

'Awful,' the Colonel told her.  'Forget it.  Too many rear-guard
actions coming back from Moskova.'

'But they called him the bravest of the brave.'

'You can't eat on that.  You have to be that, always, and then be the
smartest of the smart.  Then you need a lot of stuff coming up.'

'Tell me about Paris, please.  We should not make more love, I know.'

'I don't know it.  Who says it?'

'I say it because I love you.'

'All right.  You said it and you love me.  So we act on that.  The hell
with it.'

'Do you think we could once more if it would not hurt you?'

'Hurt me?' the Colonel said.  'When the hell was I ever hurt?'




Chapter XIV

'Please don't be bad,' she said, pulling the blanket over them both.
'Please drink a glass of this with me.  You know you've been hurt.'

'Exactly,' the Colonel said.  'Let's forget it.'

'All right,' she said.  'I learned that word, or those two words from
you.  We have forgotten it.'

'Why do you like the hand?' the Colonel asked, placing it where he
should.

'Please don't pretend to be stupid and please let's not think of
anything, or anything, or anything.'

'I am stupid,' the Colonel said.  'But I won't think of anything or
anything nor of nothing nor of his brother, to-morrow.'

'Please be good and kind.'

'I will be.  And I will tell you, now, a military secret.  Top Secret
equals British Most Secret.  I love you.'

'That's nice,' she said.  'And you put it nicely.'

'I'm nice,' the Colonel said and checked on the bridge that was coming
up and saw there was clearance.  'That's the first thing people notice
about me.'

'I always use the wrong words,' the girl said.  'Please just love me.
I wish it was me who could love you.'

'You do.'

'Yes, I do,' she said.  'With all my heart.'

They were going with the wind now and they were both tired.

'Do you think----'

'I don't think,' the girl said.

'Well try and think.'

'I will.'

'Drink a glass of this.'

'Why not?  It's very good.'

It was.  There was still ice in the bucket and the wine was cold and
clear.

'Can I stay at the Gritti?'

'No.'

'Why not?'

'It wouldn't be right.  For them.  Nor you.  The hell with me.'

'Then I suppose I should go home.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'That is the logical supposition.'

'That is an awful way to say a sad thing.  Can't we even pretend some
things?'

'No.  I'll take you home and you sleep good and well and to-morrow we
will meet where and when you say.'

'May I call the Gritti?'

'Of course.  I'll always be awake.  Will you call when you are awake?'

'Yes.  But why do you always wake so early?'

'It is a business habit.'

'Oh, I wish you were not in that business and that you were not going
to die.'

'So do I,' said the Colonel.  'But I'm getting out of the business.'

'Yes,' she said, sleepily and comfortably.  'Then we go to Rome and get
the clothes.'

'And live happily ever after.'

'Please don't,' she said.  'Please, please, don't.  You know I made the
resolution not to cry.'

'You're crying now,' the Colonel said.  'What the hell have you got to
lose on that resolution?'

'Take me home, please.'

'That's what I was doing in the first place,' the Colonel told her.

'Be kind once first.'

'I will,' the Colonel said.

After they, or the Colonel, rather, had paid the gondoliere who was
unknowing, yet knowing all; solid, sound, respectful and trustworthy;
they walked into the Piazzetta and then across the great, cold,
wind-swept square that was hard and old under their feet.  They walked
holding close and hard in their sorrow and their happiness.

'This is the place where the German shot the pigeons,' the girl said.

'We probably killed him,' the Colonel said.  'Or his brother.  Maybe we
hanged him.  I wouldn't know.  I'm not in C.I.D.'

'Do you love me still on these water-worn, cold and old stones?'

'Yes.  I'd like to spread a bed roll here and prove it.'

'That would be more barbarous than the pigeon shooter.'

'I'm barbarous,' the Colonel said.

'Not always.'

'Thank you for the not always.'

'We turn here.'

'I think I know that.  When are they going to tear that damned Cinema
Palace down and put up a real cathedral?  That's what T5 Jackson wants.'

'When someone brings Saint Mark back another time under a load of pork
from Alexandria.'

'That was a Torcello boy.'

'You're a Torcello boy.'

'Yes.  I'm a Basso Piave boy and a Grappa boy straight here from
Pertica.  I'm a Pasubio boy, too, if you know what that means.  It was
worse just to live there than to fight anywhere else.  In the platoon
they used to share anyone's gonococci brought from Schio and carried in
a match-box.  They used to share this just so they could leave because
it was intolerable.'

'But you stayed.'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'I'm always the last man to leave the party,
fiesta I mean, not as in political party.  The truly unpopular guest.'

'Should we go?'

'I thought you had made up your mind.'

'I had.  But when you said it about unpopular guest it was unmade.'

'Keep it made up.'

'I can hold a decision.'

'I know.  You can hold any damn thing.  But, Daughter, sometimes you
don't just hold.  That is for stupids.  Sometimes you have to switch
fast.'

'I'll switch if you like.'

'No.  I think the decision was sound.'

'But won't it be an awfully long time until morning?'

'That all depends on whether one has luck or not.'

'I should sleep well.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'At your age if you can't sleep they ought to
take you out and hang you.'

'Oh please.'

'Sorry,' he said.  'I meant shoot you.'

'We are nearly home and you could be kind now if you wanted.'

'I'm so kind I stink.  Let somebody else be kind.'

They were in front of the palace now and there it was; the palace.
There was nothing to do now but pull the bell cord, or enter with the
key.  I've been lost in this place, the Colonel thought, and I was
never lost in my life.

'Please kiss me good night, kindly.'

The Colonel did and loved her so he could not bear it.

She opened the door with the key, which was in her bag.  Then she was
gone and the Colonel was alone, with the worn pavement, the wind, which
still held in the north and the shadows from where a light went on.  He
walked home.

Only tourists and lovers take gondolas, he thought.  Except to cross
the canal in the places where there are no bridges.  I ought to go to
Harry's, probably, or some damn place.  But I think I'll go home.




Chapter XV

It was really home, if a hotel room can be so described.  His pyjamas
were laid on the bed.  There was a bottle of Valpolicella by the
reading light and by the bed a bottle of mineral water, in an ice
bucket with a glass beside it on the silver tray.  The portrait had
been deframed and was placed on two chairs where he could see it from
the bed.

The Paris edition of the _New York Herald Tribune_ lay on the bed
beside his three pillows.  He used three pillows, as Amaldo knew, and
his extra bottle of medicine, not the one that he carried in his
pocket, was beside the reading light.  The inner doors of the armoire,
the mirrored ones, were opened in such a way that he could see the
portrait from the side.  His scuffed slippers were by the bed.

I'll buy it, the Colonel said, to himself, since there was no one else
there except the portrait.

He opened the Valpolicella which had been uncorked, and then re-corked,
carefully, precisely and lovingly and poured himself a glass into the
glass which was much better than any hotel should use which was faced
with breakage.

'Here's to you, Daughter,' he said.  'You beauty and lovely.  Do you
know, that, among other things, you smell good always?  You smell
wonderfully even in a high wind or under a blanket or kissing good
night.  You know almost no one does and you don't use scent.'

She looked at him from the portrait and said nothing.

'The hell with it,' he said.  'I'm not going to talk to a picture.'

What do you think went wrong to-night? he thought.

Me, I guess.  Well I will try to be a good boy to-morrow all day;
starting at first light.

'Daughter,' he said, and he was talking to her and not to a picture
now.  'Please know I love you and that I wish to be delicate and good.
And please stay with me always now.'

The picture was the same.

The Colonel took out the emeralds from his pocket and looked at them,
feeling them slide, cold and yet warm, as they take warmth and as all
good stones have warmth, from his bad hand into his good hand.

I should have put these in an envelope and locked them up, he thought.
But what the ---- security is there better than I can give them?  I
have to get these back to you fast, Daughter.

It was fun, though.  And they're not worth more than a quarter of a
million.  What I would make in four hundred years.  Have to check that
figure.

He put the stones in the pocket of his pyjamas and put a handkerchief
over them.  Then he buttoned the pocket.  The first sound thing you
learn, he thought, is to have flaps and buttons on all your pockets.  I
imagine that I learned it too early.

The stones felt good.  They were hard and warm against his flat, hard,
old and warm chest, and he noted how the wind was blowing, looked at
the portrait, poured another glass of Valpolicella and then started to
read the Paris edition of the _New York Herald Tribune_.

I ought to take the pills, he thought.  But the hell with the pills.

Then he took them just the same and went on reading the _New York
Herald_.  He was reading Red Smith and he liked him very much.




Chapter XVI

The colonel woke before daylight and checked that there was no one
sleeping with him.

The wind was still blowing hard and he went to the open windows to
check the weather.  There was no light as yet in the east across the
Grand Canal, but his eyes could see how rough the water was.  Be a hell
of a tide to-day, he thought.  Probably flood the square.  That's
always fun.  Except for the pigeons.

He went to the bathroom, taking the _Herald Tribune_ and Red Smith with
him, as well as a glass of Valpolicella.  Damn I'll be glad when the
_Gran Maestro_ gets those big fiascos, he thought.  This wine gets
awfully dreggy at the end.

He sat there, with his newspaper, thinking of the things of that day.

There would be the telephone call.  But it might be very late because
she would be sleeping late.  The young sleep late, he thought, and the
beautiful sleep half again as late.  She certainly would not call early
and the shops did not open until nine or a little later.

Hell, he thought, I have these damned stones.  How could anyone do a
thing like that?

You know how, he said to himself, reading the ads. in the back of the
paper.  You've put it on the line enough times.  It isn't crazy or
morbid.  She just wanted to put it on the line.  It was a good thing it
was me, he thought.

That is the only good thing about being me, he considered.  Well I'm
me, God-damn it.  For better or for much worse.  How would you like to
sit on the can as you have sat almost every morning of your damned life
with this in your pocket?

He was addressing no one, except, perhaps, posterity.

How many mornings have you sat in the row with all the others?  That's
the worst of it.  That and shaving.  Or you go off to be alone and
think or not think and pick a good piece of cover and there are two
riflemen there already, or some boy asleep.

There's no more privacy in the army than in a professional ----.  I've
never been in a professional ---- but I imagine they run it much the
same.  I could learn to run one, he thought.

Then I'd make all my leading ---- characters Ambassadors and the
unsuccessful ones could be Corps commanders or command military
districts in peace time.  Don't be bitter, boy, he said to himself.
It's too early in the morning and your duty's not completed yet.

What would you do with their wives, he asked himself?  Buy them new
hats or shoot them, he said.  It's all part of the same process.

He looked at himself in the mirror, set in the half-closed door.  It
showed him at a slight angle.  It's a deflexion shot, he said to
himself and they didn't lead me enough.  Boy, he said, you certainly
are a beat-up, old looking bastard.

Now you have to shave and look at that face while you do it.  Then you
must get a hair-cut.  That's easy in this town.  You're a Colonel of
Infantry, boy.  You can't go around looking like Joan of Arc or General
(Breveted) George Armstrong Custer.  That beautiful horse-cavalryman.
I guess it is fun to be that way and have a loving wife and use sawdust
for brains.  But it must have seemed like the wrong career to him when
they finished up on that hill above the Little Big Horn, with the
ponies making the circle around them in all the dust and the sage brush
crushed by the hooves of the horses of the other people and nothing
left to him for the rest of his life but that old lovely black powder
smell and his own people shooting each other and themselves, because
they were afraid of what the squaws would do to them.

The body was unspeakably mutilated, they used to put in this same
paper.  And on that hill to know you'd made one real mistake, finally
and for good and complete with true handles.  Poor horse-cavalryman, he
thought.  The end of all his dreams.  That's one good thing about being
an Infantryman.  You never have any dreams except bad dreams.

Well, he said to himself, we're finished here and pretty soon there
will be good light and I can see the portrait.  I'll be damned if I'll
turn that in.  I keep that.

Oh Christ, he said, I wonder what she looks like now sleeping.  I know
how she looks, he said to himself.  Wonderful.  She sleeps as though
she had not gone to sleep.  As though she were just resting.  I hope
she is, he thought.  I hope she's resting well.  Christ Jesus how I
love her and I hope I never do her harm.




Chapter XVII

When it started to be light, the Colonel saw the portrait.  He, very
probably, saw it as quickly as any man who was civilized and had to
read and sign the forms he did not believe in, could see an object, as
soon as it was visible.  Yes, he said to himself, I have eyes and they
have fairly fast perception still and once they had ambition.  I have
led my Ruffians where they were well peppered.  There are but three of
the two hundred and fifty of them left alive and they are for the
town's end to beg during life.

That's from Shakespeare, he told the portrait.  The winner and still
the undisputed champion.

Someone might take him, in a short bout.  But I would rather revere
him.  Did you ever read _King Lear_, Daughter?  Mr. Gene Tunney did and
he was the champion of the world.  But I read it too.  Soldiers care
for Mr. Shakespeare too, though it may seem impossible.

You have anything to say in your defence except to put your head back?
he asked the portrait.  You want some more, Shakespeare?

You don't have to defend.  You just rest and leave it as it is.  It's
no good.  Your defence and my defence is no damn good.  But who could
tell you to go out and hang yourself the way we do?

Nobody, he said to himself and to the portrait.  And certainly not me.

He put his good hand down and found that the room waiter had left a
second bottle of Valpolicella alongside of where the first had been.

If you love a country, the Colonel thought, you might as well admit it.
Sure, admit it, boy.

I have loved three and lost them thrice.  Give a credit.  We've re-took
two.  Retaken, he corrected.

And we will retake the other one, General Fat Ass Franco on his
shooting stick with the advice of his doctor and tame ducks and a
screen of Moorish cavalry when he shoots.

Yes, he said softly to the girl who looked at him clearly now in the
first and best light.

We will retake and they will all be hung upside down outside of filling
stations.  You have been warned, he added.

'Portrait,' he said, 'why the hell can't you just get into bed with me
instead of being eighteen solid stone blocks away.  Maybe more.  I'm
not as sharp now as I was; whenever.'

'Portrait,' he said to the girl and to the portrait and to the girl
both; but there wasn't any girl and the portrait was as it was painted.

'Portrait, keep your God-damn chin up so you can break my heart easier.'

It certainly was a lovely present, the Colonel thought.

'Can you manoeuvre?' he asked the portrait.  'Good and fast?'

Portrait said nothing and the Colonel answered.  You know damn well she
can.  She'd out-manoeuvre you the best day you were ever born and she
would stay and fight where you would ----, discreetly.

'Portrait,' he said.  'Boy or daughter or my one true love or whatever
it is; you know what it is, portrait.'

The Portrait, as before, did not answer.  But the Colonel, who was a
General now again, early in the morning at the only time he really
knew, and with Valpolicella, knew as absolutely as though he had just
read his third Wassermann that there was no ---- in Portrait and he
felt shame for having talked to Portrait roughly.

'I'll be the best God-damned boy you ever witnessed to-day.  And you
can tell your principal that.'

Portrait, as was her fashion, was silent.

She probably would speak to a horse-cavalryman, the General, for now he
had two stars and they grated on his shoulders and showed white in the
vague, scuffed red on the plaque in front of his jeep.  He never used
command cars, nor semi-armoured vehicles complete with sand-bags.

'The hell with you, Portrait,' he said.  'Or get your T.S. slip from
the universal chaplain of us all, with combined religions.  You ought
to be able to eat on that.'

'The hell with you,' the Portrait said, without speaking.  'You low
class soldier.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said, for now he was a Colonel again and had
relinquished all his former rank.

'I love you, Portrait, very much.  But don't get rough with me.  I love
you very much because you are beautiful.  But I love the girl better, a
million times better, hear it?'

There was no sign that she heard it, so he tired of it.

'You are in a fixed position, Portrait,' he said.  'Without or with any
frame.  And I am going to manoeuvre.'

The portrait was as silent as she had been since the concierge had
brought her into the room, and aided and abetted by the second waiter,
had shown her to the Colonel and to the girl.

The Colonel looked at her and saw she was indefensible, now that the
light was good, or almost good.

He saw, too, that she was the portrait of his own true love and so he
said, 'I am sorry for all the stupidnesses I say.  I do not wish ever
to be brutal.  Maybe we could both sleep a little while, with luck, and
then, perhaps, your Mistress would call on the telephone?'

Maybe she will even call, he thought.




Chapter XVIII

The hall porter pushed the _Gazzettina_ under the door and the Colonel
had it, noiselessly, almost as soon as it had passed through the slit.

He very nearly took it from the hall porter's hand.  He did not like
the hall porter since he had found him, one day, going through his bag,
when he, the Colonel, had re-entered the room after having left it,
presumably for some time.  He had to come back to the room to get his
bottle of medicine, which he had forgotten, and the hall porter was
well through his bag.

'I guess you don't say stick them up in this hotel,' the Colonel had
said.  'But you're no credit to your town.'

There was silence produced and re-produced, by the striped waistcoated
man with the Fascist face and the Colonel said, 'Go on, boy, look
through the rest of it.  I don't carry any military secrets with my
toilet articles.'

Since then, there was scant friendship between them and the Colonel
enjoyed trying to take the morning paper from the striped waistcoated
man's hand; noiselessly, and when he heard, or saw it first make a move
under the door.

'O.K., you won to-day, jerk,' he said in the best Venetian dialect he
could summon at that hour.  'Go hang yourself.'

But they don't hang themselves, he thought.  They just have to go on
putting papers under other people's doors that do not even hate them.
It must be quite a difficult trade being an ex-Fascist.  Maybe he is
not an ex-Fascist, too.  How do you know.

I can't hate Fascists, he thought.  Nor Krauts, either, since
unfortunately, I am a soldier.

'Listen, Portrait,' he said.  'Do I have to hate the Krauts because we
kill them?  Do I have to hate them as soldiers and as human beings?  It
seems too easy a solution to me.'

Well, Portrait.  Forget it.  Forget it.  You're not old enough to know
about it.  You are two years younger than the girl that you portray and
she is younger and older than hell; which is quite an old place.

'Listen, Portrait,' he said and, saying it, knew that now, as long as
he lived, he would have someone to talk to at the early hours that he
woke.

'As I was saying, Portrait.  The hell with that too.  That's too old
for you too.  That is one of the things you can't say no matter how
true it is.  There are lots of things I can never say to you and maybe
that will be good for me.  It is about time something was.  What do you
think would be good for me, Portrait?'

'What's the matter, Portrait?' he asked her.  'You getting hungry?  I
am.'

So he rang the bell for the waiter who would bring breakfast.

He knew that now, even though the light was so good that every wave
showed on the Grand Canal, lead-coloured and solid heavy with the wind
and the tide now high over the landing steps of the Palace directly
opposite his room, that there would be no telephone call for several
hours.

The young sleep good, he thought.  They deserve it.

'Why do we have to get old?' he asked the waiter who had come in with
his glass-eye and the menu.

'I don't know, my Colonel.  I suppose it is a natural process.'

'Yes.  I guess I imagine that too.  The eggs fried with their faces up.
Tea and toast.'

'You don't want anything American?'

'The hell with anything American except me.  Is the _Gran Maestro_
astir yet?'

'He has your Valpolicella in the big wicker fiascos of two litres and I
have brought this decanter with it.'

'That one,' the Colonel said.  'I wish to Christ I could give him a
regiment.'

'I don't think he would want one, really.'

'No,' the Colonel said.  'I don't want one, really, myself.'




Chapter XIX

The colonel breakfasted with the leisure of a fighter who has been
clipped badly, hears four and knows how to relax truly for five seconds
more.

'Portrait,' he said.  'You ought to relax too.  That's the only thing
that is going to be difficult about you.  That's what they call the
static element in painting.  You know, Portrait that almost no
pictures, paintings rather, move at all.  A few do, but not many.

'I wish that your mistress was here and we could have movement.  How do
girls like you and she know so much so damn young and be so beautiful?

'With us, if a girl is really beautiful, she comes from Texas and
maybe, with luck, she can tell you what month it is.  They can all
count good though.

'They teach them how to count and keep their legs together and how to
put their hair up in pin curls.  Sometime, Portrait, for your sins, if
you have any, you ought to have to sleep in a bed with a girl who has
put her hair up in pin curls to be beautiful to-morrow.  Not to-night.
They'd never be beautiful to-night.  For to-morrow, when we make the
competition.

'The girl, Renata, that you are, is sleeping now without ever having
done anything to her hair.  She is sleeping with it spread out on the
pillow and all it is to her is a glorious, dark, silky annoyance, that
she can hardly remember to comb, except that her governess taught her.

'I see her in the street with the lovely long-legged stride and the
wind doing anything it wants to her hair and her true breasts under the
sweater and then I see the nights in Texas with the pin curls; tight
and subjected by metallic instruments.

'Pin me no pin curls, my beloved,' he said to the portrait, 'and I will
try to lay it on the line in round, heavy, hard silver dollars or with
the other.'

I mustn't get rough, he thought.

Then he said to the portrait, for he did not capitalize her now in his
mind, 'You are so God-damned beautiful you stink.  Also you are
jail-bait.  Renata's two years older now.  You are under seventeen.'

And why can't I have her and love her and cherish her and never be
rude, nor bad and have the five sons that go to the five corners of the
world; wherever that is!  I don't know.  I guess the cards we draw are
those we get.  You wouldn't like to re-deal would you, dealer?

No.  They only deal to you once and then you pick them up and play
them.  I can play them, if I draw any damn thing at all, he told
portrait; who was also unimpressed.

'Portrait,' he said.  'You better look the other way so that you will
not be un-maidenly.  I am going to take a shower now and shave,
something you will never have to do, and put on my soldier-suit and go
and walk around this town even though it is too early.'

So, he got out of bed, favouring his bad leg, which hurt him always.
He pulled the reading light with his bad hand.  There was sufficient
light and he had been wasting electricity for nearly an hour.

He regretted this as he regretted all his errors.  He walked past
portrait, only looking casually and looked at himself in the mirror.
He had dropped both parts of his pyjamas and he looked at himself
critically and truly.

'You beat-up old bastard,' he said to the mirror.  Portrait was a thing
of the past.  Mirror was actuality and of this day.

The gut is flat, he said without uttering it.  The chest is all right
except where it contains the defective muscle.  We are hung as we are
hung, for better or worse, or something, or something awful.

You are one half a hundred years old, you bastard you.  Now go in and
take a shower and scrub good and afterwards put on your soldier-suit.
To-day is another day.




Chapter XX

The colonel stopped at the reception desk in the lobby, but the
concierge was not there yet.  There was only the night porter.

'Can you put something in the safe for me?'

'No, my Colonel.  No one may open the safe until the assistant manager,
or the concierge, arrives.  But I will guard anything for you that you
wish.'

'Thank you.  It's not worth the trouble,' and he buttoned the Gritti
envelope, with the stones inside, the envelope addressed to himself,
into the inside left pocket of his tunic.

'There's no real crime here now,' the night porter said.

It had been a long night and he was happy to speak to someone.  'There
never really was, my Colonel.  There are only differences of opinion
and politics.'

'What do you have for politics?' the Colonel asked; for he was lonely,
too.

'About what you would expect.'

'I see.  And how is your thing going?'

'I think it goes quite well.  Maybe not as well as last year.  But
still quite well.  We were beaten and we have to wait a while now.'

'Do you work at it?'

'Not much.  It is more the politics of my heart than of my head.  I
believe in it with my head too, but I have very little political
development.'

'When you get it you won't have any heart.'

'Maybe not.  Do you have politics in the army?'

'Plenty,' the Colonel said.  'But not what you mean.'

'Well, we better not discuss it then.  I have not meant to be
intrusive.'

'I asked the question; the original question rather.  It was only to
talk.  It was not an interrogation.'

'I don't think it was.  You do not have the face of an inquisitor, my
Colonel, and I know about the Order, although I am not a member.'

'You may be member material.  I'll take it up with the _Gran Maestro_.'

'We come from the same town; but from distinct quarters.'

'It's a good town.'

'My Colonel, I have so little political development that I believe all
honourable men are honourable.'

'Oh you'll get over that,' the Colonel assured him.  'Don't worry, boy.
You've got a young party.  Naturally you make errors.'

'Please don't talk like that.'

'It was just rough early morning joking.'

'Tell me, my Colonel, what do you really think about Tito?'

'I think several things.  But he's my next-door neighbour.  I've found
it better not to talk about my neighbour.'

'I'd like to learn.'

'Then learn it the hard way.  Don't you know people don't give answers
to such questions?'

'I had hoped they did.'

'They don't,' the Colonel said.  'Not in my position.  All I can tell
you is that Mr. Tito has plenty problems.'

'Well, I know that now truly,' the night porter who was really only a
boy said.

'I hope you do,' the Colonel said.  'I wouldn't call it, as knowledge,
any pearl of great price.  Now, good day, for I must take a walk for
the good of my liver, or something.'

'Good day, my Colonel.  _Fa brutto tempo_.'

'_Bruttissimo_,' the Colonel said and, pulling the belt of his raincoat
tight and settling his shoulders into it and the skirts well down, he
stepped out into the wind.

Chapter XXI

The colonel took the ten _centesimi_ gondola across the Canal, paying
the usual dirty note and standing with the crowd of those condemned to
early rising.

He looked back at the Gritti and saw the windows of his room; still
open.  There was no promise, nor threat of rain; only the same strong,
wild, cold wind from the mountains.  Everyone in the gondola looked
cold and the Colonel thought, I wish I could issue these wind-proof
coats to everyone on board.  God, and every officer that ever wore one,
knows they are not water-proof and who made the money out of that one?

You can't get water through a Burberry.  But I suppose some able jerk
has his boy in Groton now, or maybe Canterbury, where the big
contractors' boys go, because our coats leaked.

And what about some brother officer of mine who split with him?  I
wonder who the Benny Meyers of the ground forces were?  There probably
wasn't only one.  Probably, he thought, there must be very many.  You
must not be awake yet, to talk that simply.  They do keep the wind out
though.  The raincoats.  Raincoats my ass.

The gondola pulled up between the stakes on the far bank of the canal
and the Colonel watched the black-clad people climb up out of the
black-painted vehicle.  Is she a vehicle?  he thought.  Or must a
vehicle have wheels or be tracked?

Nobody would give you a penny for your thoughts, he thought.  Not this
morning.  But I've seen them worth a certain amount of money when the
chips were down.

He penetrated into the far side of the city, the side that finally
fronted on the Adriatic and that he liked the best.  He was going in by
a very narrow street and he was going to not keep track of the number
of more or less north and south streets that he crossed, nor count the
bridges and then try and orient himself so he would come out at the
market without getting up any dead ends.

It was a game you play, as some people used to play double Canfield or
any solitary card games.  But it had the advantage of you moving while
you do it and that you look at the houses, the minor vistas, the shops
and the _trattorias_ and at old palaces of the city of Venice while you
are walking.  If you loved the city of Venice it was an excellent game.

It is a sort of _solitaire ambulante_ and what you win is the happiness
of your eye and heart.  If you made the market, on this side of town,
without ever being stymied, you won the game.  But you must not make it
too easy and you must not count.

On the other side of the town, game was to leave from the Gritti and
make the Rialto by the _Fondamente Nuove_ without a mistake.

Then you could climb the bridge and cross it and go down into the
market.  He liked the market best.  It was the part of any town he
always went to first.

Just then he heard the two young men behind him saying the things about
him.  He knew they were young men by their voices and he did not look
back, but listened carefully for distance and waited for the next turn
to see them, as he turned.

They are on their way to work, he decided.  Maybe they are former
Fascists or maybe they are something else, or maybe it is just the line
that they are talking.  But they are making it pretty personal now.  It
isn't just Americans, it is also me, myself, my grey hair, the slightly
crooked way I walk, the combat boots (those, of that stripe, disliked
the practicability of combat boots.  They liked boots that rang on the
flag stones and took a high black polish).

It is my uniform which they find to be without grace.  Now it is why I
am walking at this hour and now it is their absolute security that I
can no longer make love.

The Colonel swung sharp to the left at the next corner, seeing what he
had to deal with and the exact distance and when the two young men came
around the corner which was formed by the apse of the church of Frari
there was no Colonel.  He was in the dead angle behind the apse of the
ancient church and as they passed, he, hearing them come by their talk,
stepped out with a hand in each low pocket of his raincoat and turned
himself and the raincoat, with the two hands in the pockets, towards
them.

They stopped and he looked at them both in the face and smiled his old
and worn death smile.  Then he looked down at their feet, as you always
look at the feet of such people, since they wear their shoes too tight
and when you take the shoes off them you see their hammer-toes.  The
Colonel spat on the pavement and said nothing.

The two of them, they _were_ the first thing he had suspected, looked
at him with hatred and with that other thing.  Then they were off like
marsh-birds, walking with the long strides of herons too, the Colonel
thought, and something of the flight of curlews and looking back with
hatred, waiting to have the last word if the distance was ever safe.

It is a pity they weren't ten against one, the Colonel thought.  They
might have fought.  I should not blame them, since they were defeated.

But their manners were not good in respect to a man of my rank and age.
Also it was not intelligent to think all fifty-year-old colonels would
not understand their language.  Nor was it intelligent to think old
Infantrymen would not fight this early in the morning against the
simple odds of two to one.

I'd hate to fight in this town where I love the people.  I would avoid
it.  But couldn't those badly educated youths realize what sort of
animal they were dealing with?  Don't they know how you get to walk
that way?  Nor any of the other signs that combat people show as surely
as a fisherman's hands tell you if he is a fisherman from the creases
from the cord cuts.

It is true they only saw my back and ass and legs and boots.  But you'd
think they might have told from the way they must move.  Maybe they
don't any more.  But when I had a chance to look at them and think.
Take the two of them out and hang them, I believe they understood.
They understood quite clearly.

What's a man's life worth anyway?  Ten thousand dollars if his
insurance is paid up in our army.  What the hell has that got to do
with it.  Oh yes, that was what I was thinking about before those jerks
showed; how much money I had saved my government, in my time when
people like Benny Meyers were in the trough.

Yes, he said and how much you lost them at the Chateau that time at ten
Gs a head.  Well nobody ever really understood it except me, I guess.
There's no reason to tell them now.  Your commanding general sometimes
puts things down as the Fortunes of War.  Back at Army they know such
things are bound to happen.  You do it, as ordered, with a big butcher
bill and you're a hero.

Christ, I am opposed to the excessive butcher bill, he thought.  But
you get the orders, and you have to carry them out.  It is the mistakes
that are no good to sleep with.  But why the hell sleep with them
anyway.  It never did any good.  But they can certainly crawl into a
sack sometimes.  They can crawl in and stay in there with you.

Cheer up, boy, he said.  Remember you had a lot of money on you when
you picked that one.  And you might have been stripped if you lost.
You can't fight a lick any more with your hands and you didn't have any
weapon.

So don't be gloomy, boy, or man, or Colonel, or busted General.  We're
almost to the market now and you made it without hardly noticing.

Hardly noticing is bad, he added.




Chapter XXII

He loved the market.  A great part of it was close-packed and crowded
into several side streets and it was so concentrated that it was
difficult not to jostle people, unintentionally, and each time you
stopped to look, to buy, or to admire, you formed an _îlot de
résistance_ against the flow of the morning attack of the purchasers.

The Colonel liked to study the spread and high piled cheeses and the
great sausages.  People at home think _mortadella_ is a sausage, he
thought.

Then he said to the woman in the booth, 'Let me try a little of that
sausage, please.  Only a sliver.'

She cut a thin, paper thin, slice for him, ferociously and lovingly,
and when the Colonel tasted it there was the half smoky, black
pepper-corned, true flavour of the meat from the hogs that ate acorns
in the mountains.

'I will take a quarter of a kilo.'

The Barone's lunches for the shooting blinds were of a Spartan quality,
which the Colonel respected, since he knew no one should eat much while
shooting.  He felt, though, that he might augment the lunch with his
sausage and share it with the poler and picker-upper.  He might give a
slice to Bobby, the retriever, who would be wet through to his hide
many times and enthusiastic still, but shaking with cold.

'Is this the best sausage that you have?' he asked the woman.  'Have
you nothing that does not show and is reserved for better and steadier
customers?'

'This is the best sausage.  There are many other sausages, as you know.
But this is the best.'

'Then give me one-eighth of a kilo of a sausage that is highly
fortifying, but is not highly seasoned.'

'I have it,' she said.  'It is a little new but exactly as you
describe.'

This sausage was for Bobby.

But you do not say that you buy sausages for a dog in Italy where the
worst crime is to be considered a fool and many people go hungry.  You
may give expensive sausage to a dog before a man who works for his
living and knows what a dog goes through in water in cold weather.  But
you do not buy them, stating your purpose in possessing them, unless
you are a fool, or a millionaire from the war and from after.

The Colonel paid for the wrapped-up package and proceeded on through
the market inhaling the smell of roasted coffee and looking at the
amount of fat on each carcass in the butcher section, as though he were
enjoying the Dutch painters, whose names no one remembers, who painted,
in perfection of detail, all things you shot, or that were eatable.

A market is the closest thing to a good museum like the Prado or as the
Accademia is now, the Colonel thought.

He took a short cut and was at the fish market.

In the market, spread on the slippery stone floor, or in their baskets,
or their rope-handled boxes, were the heavy, grey-green lobsters with
their magenta overtones that presaged their death in boiling water.
They have all been captured by treachery, the Colonel thought, and
their claws are pegged.

There were the small soles and there were a few albacore and bonito.
These last, the Colonel thought, looked like boat-tailed bullets,
dignified in death and with the huge eye of the pelagic fish.

They were not made to be caught except for their voraciousness.  The
poor sole exists, in shallow water, to feed man.  But these other
roving bullets, in their great bands, live in blue water and travel
through all oceans and all seas.

A nickel for your thoughts now, he thought.  Let's see what else they
have.

There were many eels, alive and no longer confident in their eeldom.
There were fine prawns that could make a scampi brochetto spitted and
broiled on a rapier-like instrument that could be used as a Brooklyn
ice-pick.  There were medium-sized shrimps, grey and opalescent,
awaiting their turn, too, for the boiling water and their immortality,
to have their shucked carcasses float out easily on an ebb tide on the
Grand Canal.

The speedy shrimp, the Colonel thought, with tentacles longer than the
moustaches of that old Japanese admiral, comes here now to die for our
benefit.  Oh Christian shrimp, he thought, master of retreat, and with
your wonderful intelligence service in those two light whips, why did
they not teach you about nets and that lights are dangerous?

Must have been some slip-up, he thought.

Now he looked at the many small crustaceans, the razor-edge clams you
only should eat raw if you had your typhoid shots up to date, and all
the small delectables.

He went past these, stopping to ask one seller where his clams came
from.  They came from a good place, without sewerage, and the Colonel
asked to have six opened.  He drank the juice and cut the clam out,
cutting close against the shell with the curved knife the man handed
him.  The man had handed him the knife because he knew from experience
the Colonel cut closer to the shell than he had been taught to cut.

The Colonel paid him the pittance that they cost, which must have been
much greater than the pittance those received who caught them, and he
thought, now I must see the stream and canal fishes and get back to the
hotel.




Chapter XXIII

The colonel arrived at the lobby of the Hotel Gritti-Palace.  His
gondolieres were paid off and, now, inside the hotel, there was no wind.

It had taken two men to bring the gondola up the Grand Canal from the
market.  They had both worked hard, and he had paid them what it was
worth, and some more.

'Are there any calls for me?' he asked the concierge, who was now in
attendance.

The concierge was light, fast, sharp-faced, intelligent and polite,
always, without subservience.  He wore the crossed keys of his office
on the lapels of his blue uniform without ostentation.  He was the
concierge.  It is a rank very close to that of Captain, the Colonel
thought.  An officer and not a Gentleman.  Make it top sergeant in the
old days; except he's dealing always with the brass.

'My lady has called twice,' the concierge said in English.  Or whatever
that language should be called we all speak, the Colonel thought.
Leave it at English.  That is about what they have left.  They should
be allowed to keep the name of the language.  Cripps will probably
ration it shortly, anyway.

'Please put me through to her at once,' he told the concierge.

The concierge commenced to dial numbers.

'You may talk over there, my Colonel,' he said.  'I have made the
connection.'

'You're fast.'

'Over there,' the concierge said.

Inside the booth the Colonel lifted the receiver and said,
automatically, 'Colonel Cantwell speaking.'

'I called twice, Richard,' the girl said.  'But they explained that you
were out.  Where were you?'

'At the market.  How are you, my lovely?'

'No one listens on this phone at this hour.  I am your lovely.  Whoever
that is.'

'You.  Did you sleep well?'

'It was like ski-ing in the dark.  Not really ski-ing but really dark.'

'That's the way it should be.  Why did you wake so early?  You've
frightened my concierge.'

'If it is not un-maidenly, how soon can we meet, and where?'

'Where you wish and when you wish.'

'Do you still have the stones and did Miss Portrait help any?'

'Yes to both questions.  The stones are in my upper left-hand pocket
and buttoned down.  Miss Portrait and I talked late and early and it
made everything much easier.'

'Do you love her more than me?'

'I'm not abnormal yet.  Perhaps that's bragging.  But she's lovely.'

'Where should we meet?'

'Should we have breakfast at the Florian, on the right-hand side of the
square?  The square should be flooded and it will be fun to watch.'

'I'll be there in twenty minutes if you want me.'

'I want you,' the Colonel said and hung up.

Coming out of the telephone booth he, suddenly, did not feel good and
then he felt as though the devil had him in an iron cage, built like an
iron lung or an iron maiden, and he walked, grey-faced, to the
concierge's desk and said, in Italian, 'Domenico, Ico, could you get me
a glass of water, please?'

The concierge was gone and he leaned on the desk resting.  He rested
lightly and without illusion.  Then the concierge was back with the
glass of water, and he took four tablets of the type that you take two,
and he continued resting as lightly as a hawk rests.

'Domenico,' he said.

'Yes.'

'I have something here in an envelope that you can put in the safe.  It
may be called for either by myself, in person, or in writing, or by the
person you have just put that call through to.  Would you like that in
writing?'

'No.  It would be unnecessary.'

'But what about you, boy?  You're not immortal, are you?'

'Fairly so,' the concierge told him.  'But I will put it in writing,
and after me, comes the Manager and the Assistant Manager.'

'Both good men,' the Colonel agreed.

'Wouldn't you like to sit down, my Colonel?'

'No.  Who sits down except men and women in change of life hotels?  Do
you sit down?'

'No.'

'I can rest on my feet, or against a God-damned tree.  My countrymen
sit down, or lie down, or fall down.  Give them a few energy crackers
to stall their whimpers.'

He was talking too much to regain confidence quickly.

'Do they really have energy crackers?'

'Sure.  It has something in it that keeps you from getting excited.
It's like the atomic bomb, only played backwards.'

'I can't believe it.'

'We have the most terrific military secrets that one General's wife
ever told another.  Energy crackers is the least of it.  Next time we
will give all Venice botulism from 56,000 feet.  There's nothing to
it,' the Colonel explained.  'They give you anthrax, and you give them
botulism.'

'But it will be horrible.'

'It will be worse than that,' the Colonel assured him.  'This isn't
classified.  It's all been published.  And while it goes on you can
hear Margaret, if you tune in right, singing the Star Spangled Banner
on the radio.  I think that could be arranged.  The voice I would not
describe as a big one.  Not as we know voices who have heard the good
ones in our time.  But everything is a trick now.  The radio can almost
make the voice.  And the Star Spangled Banner is fool-proof until
towards the last.'

'Do you think they will drop anything here?'

'No.  They never have.'

The Colonel, who was four star general now, in his wrath and in his
agony and in his need for confidence, but secured temporarily through
the absorption of the tablets, said, '_Ciao_, Domenico,' and left the
Gritti.

He figured it took twelve and one half minutes to reach the place where
his true love would probably arrive a little late.  He walked it
carefully and at the speed he should walk it.  The bridges were all the
same.




Chapter XXIV

His true love was at the table at the exact time that she said she
would be.  She was as beautiful as always In the hard, morning light
that came across the flooded square, and she said, 'Please, Richard.
Are you all right?  Please?'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'You wonder beauty.'

'Did you go to all our places in the market?'

'Only a few of them.  I did not go where they have the wild ducks.'

'Thank you.'

'For nothing,' the Colonel said.  'I never go there when we are not
together.'

'Don't you think I should go to the shoot?'

'No.  I am quite sure.  Alvarito would have asked you if he wanted you.'

'He might not have asked me because he wanted me.'

'That's true,' the Colonel said, and pondered that for two seconds.
'What do you want for breakfast?'

'Breakfast is worthless here, and I don't like the square when it is
flooded.  It is sad and the pigeons have no place to alight.  It is
only really fun towards the last when the children play.  Should we go
and have breakfast at the Gritti?'

'Do you want to?'

'Yes.'

'Good.  We'll have breakfast there.  I've had mine already.'

'Really?'

'I'll have some coffee and hot rolls, and only feel them with my
fingers.  Are you awfully hungry?'

'Awfully,' she said, truly.

'We'll give breakfast the full treatment,' the Colonel said.  'You'll
wish you had never heard of breakfast.'

As they walked, with the wind at their back, and her hair blowing
better than any banner, she asked him, holding close, 'Do you still
love me in the cold, hard Venice light of morning?  It is really cold
and hard, isn't it?'

'I love you and it is cold and hard.'

'I loved you all night when I was ski-ing in the dark.'

'How do you do that?'

'It is the same runs except that it is dark and the snow is dark
instead of light.  You ski the same; controlled and good.'

'Did you ski all night?  That would be many runs.'

'No.  Afterwards I slept soundly and well and I woke happy.  You were
with me and you were asleep like a baby.'

'I wasn't with you and I was not asleep.'

'You're with me now,' she said and held close and tight.

'And we are almost there.'

'Yes.'

'Have I told you, yet, properly, that I love you?'

'You told me.  But tell me again.'

'I love you,' he said.  'Take it frontally and formally please.'

'I take it anyway you want as long as it is true.'

'That's the proper attitude,' he said.  'You good, brave, lovely girl.
Turn your hair sideways once on top of this bridge and let it blow
obliquely.'

He had made a concession, with obliquely, instead of saying, correctly,
oblique.

'That's easy,' she said.  'Do you like it?'

He looked and saw the profile and the wonder early morning colour and
her chest upstanding in the black sweater and her eyes in the wind and
he said, 'Yes, I like it.'

'I'm very glad,' she said.




Chapter XXV

At the Gritti, the _Gran Maestro_ seated them at the table which was
beside the window that looked out on the Grand Canal.  There was no one
else in the dining-room.

The _Gran Maestro_ was festive and well with the morning.  He took his
ulcers day by day, and his heart the same way.  When they did not hurt
he did not hurt either.

'Your pitted compatriot eats in bed at his hotel, my colleague tells
me,' he confided to the Colonel.  'We may have a few Belgians.  "The
bravest of these were the Belgians,"' he quoted.  'There is a pair of
_pescecani_ from you know where.  But they are exhausted and I believe
they will eat, as pigs, in their room.'

'An excellent situation report,' the Colonel said.  'Our problem, _Gran
Maestro_, is that I have already eaten in my room as pitted does and as
the _pescecani_ will.  But this lady----'

'Young girl,' interrupted the _Gran Maestro_ with his whole-face smile.
He was feeling very good since it was a completely new day.

'This very young lady wants a breakfast to end breakfasts.'

'I understand,' the _Gran Maestro_ said, and he looked at Renata and
his heart rolled over as a porpoise does in the sea.  It is a beautiful
movement and only a few people in this world can feel it and accomplish
it.

'What do you want to eat, Daughter?' the Colonel asked, looking at her
early morning, un-retouched dark beauty.

'Everything.'

'Would you give any suggestions?'

'Tea instead of coffee and whatever the _Gran Maestro_ can salvage.'

'It won't be salvage, Daughter,' said the _Gran Maestro_.

'I'm the one who calls her Daughter.'

'I said it honestly,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'We can make or
_fabricar rognons_ grilled with _champignons_ dug by people I know.
Or, raised in damp cellars.  There can be an omelet with truffles dug
by pigs of distinction.  There can be real Canadian bacon from maybe
Canada, even.'

'Wherever that is,' the girl said happily and unillusioned.

'Wherever that is,' said the Colonel seriously.  'And I know damn well
where it is.'

'I think we should stop the jokes now and get to the breakfast.'

'If it is not un-maidenly I think so too.'

'Mine is a decanted flask of the Valpolicella.'

'Nothing else?'

'Bring me one ration of the alleged Canadian bacon,' the Colonel said.

He looked at the girl, since they were alone now, and he said, 'How are
you, my dearest?'

'Quite hungry, I suppose.  But thank you for being good for so long a
time.'

'It was easy,' the Colonel told her in Italian.




Chapter XXVI

They sat there at the table and watched the early stormy light over the
Canal.  The grey had turned to a yellow-grey now, with the sun, and the
waves were working against the outgoing tide.

'Mummy says she can't live here too long at any time because there are
no trees,' the girl said.  'That's why she goes to the country.'

'That's why everyone goes to the country,' the Colonel said.  'We could
plant a few trees if we found a place with a big enough garden.'

'I like Lombardy poplars and plane trees the best, but I am still quite
uneducated.'

'I like them, and cypresses and chestnut trees.  The real chestnut and
the horse-chestnut.  But you will never see trees, Daughter, until we
go to America.  Wait till you see a white pine or a ponderosa pine.'

'Will we see them when we make the long trip and stop at all the
filling stations or comfort stations or whatever they are called?'

'Lodges and Tourist Camps,' the Colonel said.  'Those others we stop
at; but not for the night.'

'I want so much for us to roll up to a comfort station and plank down
my money and tell them to fill her up and check the oil, Mac, the way
it is in American books or in the films.'

'That's a filling station.'

'Then what is a comfort station?'

'Where you go, you know----'

'Oh,' the girl said and blushed.  'I'm sorry.'

'I want to learn American so much.  But I suppose I shall say barbarous
things the way you do sometimes in Italian.'

'It is an easy language.  The further West you go the straighter and
the easier it becomes.'

The _Gran Maestro_ brought the breakfast and the odour of it, although
it did not spread through the room, due to the silver covers on the
dishes, came to them steady and as broiled bacon and kidneys, with the
dark lustreless smell of grilled mushrooms added.

'It looks lovely,' the girl said.  'Thank you very much, _Gran
Maestro_.  Should I talk American?' she asked the Colonel.  She
extended her hand to the _Gran Maestro_ lightly, and fastly, so that it
darted as a rapier does, and said, 'Put it there, Pal.  This grub is
tops.'

The _Gran Maestro_ said, 'Thank you, my lady.'

'Should I have said chow instead of grub?' the girl asked the Colonel.

'They are really interchangeable.'

'Did they talk like that out West when you were a boy?  What would you
say at breakfast?'

'Breakfast was served, or offered up, by the cook.  He would say, "Come
and get it, you sons of bitches, or I'll throw it away."'

'I must learn that for in the country.  Sometimes when we have the
British Ambassador and his dull wife for dinner I will teach the
footman, who will announce dinner, to say, "Come and get it, you sons
of bitches, or we will throw it away."'

'He'd devaluate,' the Colonel said.  'At any rate, it would be an
interesting experiment.'

'Tell me something I can say in true American to the pitted one if he
comes in.  I will just whisper it in his ear as though I were making a
rendezvous, as they did in the old days.'

'It would depend on how he looks.  If he is very dejected looking, you
might whisper to him, "Listen, Mac.  You hired out to be tough, didn't
you?"'

'That's lovely,' she said, and repeated it in a voice she had learned
from Ida Lupino.  'Can I say it to the _Gran Maestro_?'

'Sure.  Why not.  _Gran Maestro_!'

The _Gran Maestro_ came over and leaned forward attentively.

'Listen, Mac.  You hired out to be tough, didn't you?' the girl
hard-worded him.

'I did indeed,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'Thank you for stating it so
exactly.'

'If that one comes in and you wish to speak to him after he has eaten,
just whisper in his ear, "Wipe the egg off your chin, Jack, and
straighten up and fly right."'

'I'll remember it and I'll practise it at home.'

'What are we going to do after breakfast?'

'Should we go up and look at the picture and see if it is of any value;
I mean any good; in the daylight?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.




Chapter XXVII

Upstairs the room was already done and the Colonel, who had anticipated
a possible messiness of locale, was pleased.

'Stand by it once,' he said.  Then remembered to add, 'Please.'

She stood by it, and he looked at it from where he had looked at it
last night.

'There's no comparison, of course,' he said.  'I don't mean likeness.
The likeness is excellent.'

'Was there supposed to be a comparison?' the girl asked, and swung her
head back and stood there with the black sweater of the portrait.

'Of course not.  But last night, and at first light, I talked to the
portrait as though it were you.'

'That was nice of you and shows it has served some useful purpose.'

They were lying now on the bed and the girl said to him, 'Don't you
ever close windows?'

'No.  Do you?'

'Only when it rains.'

'How much alike are we?'

'I don't know.  We never had much of a chance to find out.'

'We've never had a fair chance.  But we've had enough of a chance for
me to know.'

'And when you know what the hell have you got?' the Colonel asked.

'I don't know.  Something better than there is, I suppose.'

'Sure.  We ought to try for that.  I don't believe in limited
objectives.  Sometimes you're forced to, though.'

'What is your great sorrow?'

'Other people's orders,' he said.  'What's yours?'

'You.'

'I don't want to be a sorrow.  I've been a sorry son of a bitch many
times.  But I never was anybody's sorrow.'

'Well you are mine now.'

'All right,' he said.  'We'll take it that way.'

'You're nice to take it that way.  You're very kind this morning.  I'm
so ashamed about how things are.  Please hold me very close and let's
not talk, or think, about how things might have been different.'

'Daughter, that's one of the few things I know how to do.'

'You know many, many things.  Don't say such a thing.'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'I know how to fight forwards and how to
fight backwards and what else?'

'About pictures and about books and about life.'

'That's easy.  You just look at the pictures without prejudice, and you
read the books with as open a mind as you have, and you live life.'

'Don't take off your tunic, please.'

'All right.'

'You do anything when I say please.'

'I have done things without.'

'Not very often.'

'No,' the Colonel agreed.  'Please is a pretty word.'

'Please, please, please.'

'_Per Piacere_.  It means for pleasure.  I wish we always talked
Italian.'

'We could in the dark.  Although there are things that say better in
English.

'I love you my last true and only love,' she quoted.  'When lilacs last
in the door-yard bloomed.  And out of the cradle endlessly rocking.
And come and get it, you sons of bitches, or I'll throw it away.  You
don't want those in other languages, do you, Richard?'

'No.'

'Kiss me again, please.'

'Unnecessary please.'

'I would probably end up as an unnecessary please myself.  That is the
good thing about you going to die that you can't leave me.'

'That's a little rough,' the Colonel said.  'Watch your beautiful mouth
a little on that.'

'I get rough when you get rough,' she said.  'You wouldn't want me to
be completely otherwise?'

'I would not want you to be in any way other than you are and I love
you truly, finally and for good.'

'You say nice things very clearly sometimes.  What was it happened with
you and your wife, if I may ask?'

'She was an ambitious woman and I was away too much.'

'You mean she went away, from ambition, when you only were away from
duty?'

'Sure,' the Colonel said and remembered, as unbitterly as he could.
'She had more ambition than Napoleon and about the talent of the
average High School Valedictorian.'

'Whatever that is,' the girl said.  'But let's not speak about her.
I'm sorry I asked the question.  She must be sad that she is not with
you.'

'No.  She is too conceited ever to be sad, and she married me to
advance herself in Army circles, and have better contacts for what she
considered her profession, or her art.  She was a journalist.'

'But they are dreadful,' the girl said.

'I agree.'

'But you couldn't have married a woman journalist that kept on being
that?'

'I told you I made mistakes,' the Colonel said.

'Let's talk about something nice.'

'Let's.'

'But that was terrible.  How could you have done such a thing?'

'I don't know.  I could tell you in detail but let's skip it.'

'Please let's skip it.  But I had no idea it was something as awful as
that.  You wouldn't do such a thing now, would you?'

'I promise you, my sweet.'

'But you don't ever write to her?'

'Of course not.'

'You wouldn't tell her about us, so she could write about it?'

'No.  I told her about things once, and she wrote about them.  But that
was in another country and besides the wench is dead.'

'Is she really dead?'

'Deader than Phoebus the Phoenician.  But she doesn't know it yet.'

'What would you do if we were together in the Piazza and you saw her?'

'I'd look straight through her to show her how dead she was.'

'Thank you very much,' the girl said.  'You know that another woman, or
a woman in memory, is a terrible thing for a young girl to deal with
when she is still without experience.'

'There isn't any other woman,' the Colonel told her, and his eyes were
bad and remembering.  'Nor is there any woman of memory.'

'Thank you, very much,' the girl said.  'When I look at you I believe
it truly.  But please never look at me nor think of me like that.'

'Should we hunt her down and hang her to a high tree?' the Colonel said
with anticipation.

'No.  Let us forget her.'

'She is forgotten,' the Colonel said.  And, strangely enough, she was.
It was strange because she had been present in the room for a moment,
and she had very nearly caused a panic; which is one of the strangest
things there is, the Colonel thought.  He knew about panics.

But she was gone now, for good and for ever; cauterized; exorcized and
with the eleven copies of her re-classification papers, in which was
included the formal, notarized act of divorcement, in triplicate.

'She is forgotten,' the Colonel said.  It was quite true.

'I'm so pleased,' the girl said.  'I don't know why they ever let her
into the hotel.'

'We're enough alike,' the Colonel said.  'We better not carry it too
God-damned far.'

'You can hang her if you wish because she is why we cannot marry.'

'She's forgotten,' the Colonel told her.  'Maybe she will take a good
look at herself in the mirror sometime and hang herself.'

'Now that she is out of the room we should wish her no bad luck.  But,
as a good Venetian, I wish that she were dead.'

'So do I,' the Colonel said.  'And now, since she is not, let us forget
her for keeps.'

'For keeps and for always,' the girl said.  'I hope that is the correct
diction.  Or in Spanish _para sempre_.'

'_Para sempre_ and his brother,' the Colonel said.




Chapter XXVIII

They lay together now and did not speak and the Colonel felt her heart
beat.  It is easy to feel a heart beat under a black sweater knitted by
someone in the family, and her dark hair lay, long and heavy, over his
good arm.  It isn't heavy, he thought, it is lighter than anything
there is.  She lay, quiet and loving, and whatever it was that they
possessed was in complete communication.  He kissed her on the mouth,
gently and hungrily, and then it was as though there was static,
suddenly, when communications had been perfect.

'Richard,' she said.  'I'm sorry about things.'

'Never be sorry,' the Colonel said.  'Never discuss casualties,
Daughter.'

'Say it again.'

'Daughter.'

'Will you tell me some happy things I can have for during the week and
some more of war for my education?'

'Let's skip war.'

'No.  I need it for my education.'

'I do too,' the Colonel said.  'Not manoeuvres.  You know, in our army
once, a general officer through chicanery obtained the plan of the
manoeuvre.  He anticipated every move of the enemy force and comported
himself so brilliantly that he was promoted over many better men.  And
that was why we got smacked one time.  That and the prevalence of
week-ends.'

'We're on a week-end now.'

'I know,' the Colonel said.  'I can still count up to seven.'

'But are you bitter about everything?'

'No.  It is just that I am half a hundred years old and I know things.'

'Tell me something more about Paris because I love to think of you and
Paris in the week.'

'Daughter, why don't you lay off Paris?'

'But I've been in Paris, and I will go back there again, and I want to
know.  It is the loveliest city in the world, next to our own, and I
want to know some things truly to take with me.'

'We will go together and I will tell you there.'

'Thank you.  But tell me a little now for this week only.'

'Leclerc was a high-born jerk as I think that I've explained.  Very
brave, very arrogant and extremely ambitious.  He is dead, as I said.'

'Yes, you told me.'

'They say you should never speak ill of the dead.  But I think it is
the best time to speak truly of them.  I have never said anything of a
dead that I would not say to his face,' and he added, 'in spades.'

'Let's not talk about him.  I have re-classified him in my mind.'

'What do you want then; picturesque?'

'Yes please.  I have bad taste from reading the illustrated papers.
But I will read Dante all week while you are gone.  I'll go to mass
each morning.  That should be enough.'

'Go to Harry's before lunch too.'

'I will,' she said.  'Please tell me some picturesque.'

'Don't you think we might better just go to sleep?'

'How can we go to sleep now when we have so little time?  Feel this,'
she said and pushed her whole head up under his chin until she forced
his head back.

'All right, I'll talk.'

'Give me your hand first to hold.  I'll have it in my hand when I read
the Dante and do the other things.'

'Dante was an execrable character.  More conceited than Leclerc.'

'I know.  But he did not write execrably.'

'No.  Leclerc could fight too.  Excellently.'

'Now tell me.'

Her head was on his chest now, and the Colonel said, 'Why did you not
want me to take off the tunic?'

'I like to feel the buttons.  Is it wrong?'

'I'll be a sad son of a bitch,' the Colonel said.  'How many people
fought in your family?'

'Everybody,' she said.  'Always.  They were traders as well and several
of them were Doges of this city as you know.'

'But they all fought?'

'All,' she said.  'As far as I know.'

'O.K.,' the Colonel said.  'I'll tell you any God-damn thing you want
to know.'

'Just something picturesque.  As bad or worse than in the illustrated
papers.'

'_Domenica Del Corriere_ or _Tribuna Illustrata_?'

'Worse, if possible.'

'Kiss me first.'

She kissed him kind, and hard, and desperately, and the Colonel could
not think about any fights or any picturesque or strange incidents.  He
only thought of her and how she felt and how close life comes to death
when there is ecstasy.  And what the hell is ecstasy and what's
ecstasy's rank and serial number?  And how does her black sweater feel?
And who made all her smoothness and delight and the strange pride and
sacrifice and wisdom of a child?  Yes, ecstasy is what you might have
had and instead you draw sleep's other brother.

Death is a lot of ----, he thought.  It comes to you in small fragments
that hardly show where it has entered.  It comes, sometimes,
atrociously.  It can come from unboiled water; an un-pulled-up mosquito
boot, or it can come with the great, white-hot, clanging roar we have
lived with.  It comes in small cracking whispers that precede the noise
of the automatic weapon.  It can come with the smoke-emitting arc of
the grenade, or the sharp, cracking drop of the mortar.

I have seen it come, loosening itself from the bomb rack, and falling
with that strange curve.  It comes in the metallic rending crash of a
vehicle, or the simple lack of traction on a slippery road.

It comes in bed to most people, I know, like love's opposite number.  I
have lived with it nearly all my life and the dispensing of it has been
my trade.  But what can I tell this girl now on this cold, windy
morning in the Gritti Palace Hotel?

'What would you like to know, Daughter?' he asked her.

'Everything.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'Here goes.'




Chapter XXIX

They lay on the pleasantly hard, new-made bed with their legs pressed
tight against one another, and her head was on his chest, and her hair
spread across his old hard neck; and he told her.

'We landed without much opposition.  They had the true opposition at
the other beach.  Then we had to link up with the people who had been
dropped, and take and secure various towns, and then we took Cherbourg.
This was difficult, and had to be done very fast, and the orders were
from a General called Lightning Joe that you never would have heard of.
Good General.'

'Go on, please.  You spoke about Lightning Joe before.'

'After Cherbourg we had everything.  I took nothing but an admiral's
compass because I had a small boat at that time on Chesapeake Bay.  But
we had all the Wehrmacht stamped Martell and some people had as much as
six million German-printed French francs.  They were good until a year
ago, and at that time they were worth fifty to the dollar, and many a
man has a tractor now instead of simply one mule who knew how to send
them home through his Esses, or sometimes his Gs.

'I never stole anything except the compass because I thought it was bad
luck to steal, unnecessarily, in war.  But I drank the cognac and I
used to try to figure out the different corrections on the compass when
I had time.  The compass was the only friend I had, and the telephone
was my life.  We had more wire strung than there are ---- in Texas.'

'Please keep telling me and be as little rough as you can.  I don't
know what the word means and I don't want to know.'

'Texas is a big state,' the Colonel said.  'That is why I used it and
its female population as a symbol.  You cannot say more ---- than
Wyoming because there are less than thirty thousand there, perhaps,
hell, make it fifty, and there was a lot of wire, and you kept
stringing it and rolling it up, and stringing it again.'

'Go on.'

'We will cut to the break-through,' the Colonel said.  'Please tell me
if this bores you.'

'No.'

'So we made the mucking break-through,' the Colonel said, and now his
head was turned to her head, and he was not lecturing; he was
confessing.

'The first day most of them came over and dropped the Christmas tree
ornaments that confuse the other people's radar and it was called off.
We were ready to go but they called it off.  Quite properly I am sure.
I love the very high brass like I love the pig's you know.'

'Tell it to me and don't be bad.'

'Conditions were not propitious,' the Colonel said.  'So the second day
we were for it, as our British cousins, who could not fight their way
out of a wet tissue towel, say, and over came the people of the wild,
blue yonder.

'They were still taking off from the fields where they lived on that
green-grassed aircraft carrier that they called England, when we saw
the first of them.

'Shining, bright and beautiful, because they had scraped the invasion
paint by then, or maybe they had not.  My memory is not exact about
this part.

'Anyway, Daughter, you could see the line of them going back towards
the east further than you could see.  It was like a great train.  They
were high in the sky and never more beautiful.  I told my S-2 that we
should call them the Valhalla Express.  Are you tired of it?'

'No.  I can see the Valhalla Express.  We never saw it in such numbers.
But we saw it.  Many times.'

'We were back two thousand yards from where we were to take off from.
You know what two thousand yards is, Daughter, in a war when you are
attacking?'

'No.  How could I?'

'Then the front part of the Valhalla Express dropped coloured smoke and
turned and went home.  This smoke was dropped accurately, and clearly
showed the target which was the Kraut positions.  They were good
positions and it _might_ have been impossible to move him out of them
without something mighty and picturesque such as we were experiencing.

'Then, Daughter, the next sections of the Valhalla Express dropped
everything in the world on the Krauts and where they lived and worked
to hold us up.  Later it looked as though all of the earth had erupted
and the prisoners that we took shook as a man shakes when his malaria
hits him.  They were very brave boys from the Sixth Parachute Division
and they all shook and could not control it though they tried.

'So you can see it was a good bombing.  Just the thing we always need
in this life.  Make them tremble in the fear of justice and of might.

'So then, Daughter, not to bore you, the wind was from the east and the
smoke began to blow back in our direction.  The heavies were bombing on
the smoke line and the smoke line was now over us.  Therefore they
bombed us the same as they had bombed the Krauts.  First it was the
heavies, and no one need ever worry about hell who was there that day.
Then, to really make the break-through good and to leave as few people
as possible on either side, the mediums came over and bombed who was
left.  Then we made the break-through as soon as the Valhalla Express
had gone home, stretching in its beauty and its majesty from that part
of France to all over England.'

If a man has a conscience, the Colonel thought, he might think about
air-power some time.

'Give me a glass of that Valpolicella,' the Colonel said, and
remembered to add, 'please.'

'Excuse me,' he said.  'Be comfortable, honey dog, please.  You asked
me to tell you.'

'I'm not your honey dog.  That must be someone else.'

'Correct.  You're my last and true and only love.  Is that correct?
But you asked me to tell you.'

'Please tell me,' the girl said.  'I'd like to be your honey dog if I
knew how to do it.  But I am only a girl from this town that loves you.'

'We'll operate on that,' the Colonel said.  'And I love you.  I
probably picked up that phrase in the Philippines.'

'Probably,' the girl said.  'But I would rather be your straight girl.'

'You are,' the Colonel said.  'Complete with handles and with the flag
on top.'

'Please don't be rough,' she said.  'Please love me true and tell me as
true as you can, without hurting yourself in any way.'

'I'll tell you true,' he said.  'As true as I can tell and let it hurt
who it hurts.  It is better that you hear it from me if you have
curiosity on this subject, than that you read it in some book with
stiff covers.'

'Please don't be rough.  Just tell me true and hold me tight and tell
me true until you are purged of it; if that can be.'

'I don't need to purge,' he said.  'Except heavies being used
tactically.  I have nothing against them if they use them right even if
they kill you.  But for ground support give me a man like Pete Quesada.
There is a man who will boot them in.'

'Please.'

'If you ever want to quit a beat-up character like me that guy could
give you ground support.'

'You are not beat-up, whatever that is, and I love you.'

'Please give me two tablets from that bottle and pour the glass of
Valpolicella that you neglected to pour, and I will tell you some of
the rest of it.'

'You don't have to.  You don't have to tell me and I know now it is not
good for you.  Especially not the Valhalla Express day.  I am not an
inquisitor; or whatever the female of inquisitor is.  Let us just lie
quietly and look out of the window, and watch and see what happens on
our Grand Canal.'

'Maybe we better.  Who gives a damn about the war anyway?'

'You and me, maybe,' she said and stroked his head.  'Here are the two
things from the square bottle.  Here is the glass of decanted vino.
I'll send you better from our own estates.  Please let us sleep a
little while.  Please be a good boy and we just lie together and love
each other.  Please put your hand here.'

'My good or my bad?'

'Your bad,' the girl said.  'The one I love and must think about all
week.  I cannot keep it like you keep the stones.'

'They're in the safe,' the Colonel said.  'In your name,' he added.

'Let's just sleep and not talk about any material things nor any
sorrows.'

'The hell with sorrows,' the Colonel said with his eyes closed and his
head resting lightly on the black sweater that was his fatherland.  You
have to have some damned fatherland, he thought.  Here is mine.

'Why aren't you President?' the girl asked.  'You could be an excellent
president.'

'Me president?  I served in the Montana National Guard when I was
sixteen.  But I never wore a bow tie in my life and I am not, nor ever
have been, an unsuccessful haberdasher.  I have none of the
qualifications for the Presidency.  I couldn't even head the opposition
even though I don't have to sit on telephone books to have my picture
taken.  Nor am I a no-fight general.  Hell, I never even was at SHAEF.
I couldn't even be an elder statesman.  I'm not old enough.  Now we are
governed in some way, by the dregs.  We are governed by what you find
in the bottom of dead beer glasses that whores have dunked their
cigarettes in.  The place has not even been swept out yet and they have
an amateur pianist beating on the box.'

'I don't understand it because my American is so incomplete.  But it
sounds awful.  But don't be angry about it.  Let me be angry for you.'

'Do you know what an unsuccessful haberdasher is?'

'No.'

'It is not discreditable.  There are many of them in our country.
There is at least one in every town.  No, Daughter, I am only a
fighting soldier and that is the lowest thing on earth.  In that you
run for Arlington, if they return the body.  The family has a choice.'

'Is Arlington nice?'

'I don't know,' the Colonel said.  'I was never buried there.'

'Where would you like to be buried?'

'Up in the hills,' he said, making a quick decision.  'On any part of
the high ground where we beat them.'

'I suppose you should be buried on the Grappa.'

'On the dead angle of any shell-pocked slope if they would graze cattle
over me in the summer time.'

'Do they have cattle there?'

'Sure.  They always have cattle where there is good grass in the
summer, and the girls of the highest houses, the strong built ones, the
houses _and_ the girls, that resist the snow in winter, trap foxes in
the fall after they bring the cattle down.  They feed from pole-stacked
hay.'

'And you don't want Arlington or Père Lachaise or what we have here?'

'Your miserable boneyard.'

'I know it is the most unworthy thing about the town.  The city rather.
I learned to call cities towns from you.  But I will see that you go
where you wish to go and I will go with you if you like.'

'I would not like.  That is the one thing we do alone.  Like going to
the bathroom.'

'Please do not be rough.'

'I meant that I would love to have you with me.  But it is very
egotistical and an ugly process.'

He stopped, and thought truly, but off-key, and said, 'No.  You get
married and have five sons and call them all Richard.'

'The lion-hearted,' the girl said, accepting the situation without even
a glance, and playing what there was she held as you put down all the
cards, having counted exactly.

'The louse-hearted,' the Colonel said.  'The unjust bitter criticizer
who speaks badly of everyone.'

'Please don't be rough in talking,' the girl said.  'And remember you
speak worst of all about yourself.  But hold me as close as we can and
let's think about nothing.'

He held her as close as he could and he tried to think about nothing.




Chapter XXX

The colonel and the girl lay quietly on the bed and the Colonel tried
to think of nothing; as he had thought of nothing so many times in so
many places.  But it was no good now.  It would not work any more
because it was too late.

They were not Othello and Desdemona, thank God, although it was the
same town and the girl was certainly better looking than the
Shakespearean character, and the Colonel had fought as many, or more
times than the garrulous Moor.

They are excellent soldiers, he thought.  The damned Moors.  But how
many of them have we killed in my time?  I think we killed more than a
generation if you count the final Moroccan campaign against Abdel Krim.
And each one you have to kill separately.  Nobody ever killed them in
mass, as we killed Krauts before they discovered _Einheit_.

'Daughter,' he said.  'Do you want me to really tell you, so you will
know, if I am not rough telling it?'

'I would rather have you tell me than anything.  Then we can share it.'

'It cuts pretty thin for sharing,' the Colonel said.  'It's all yours,
Daughter.  And it's only the high-lights.  You wouldn't understand the
campaigns in detail, and few others would.  Rommel might.  But they
always had him under wraps in France and, besides, we had destroyed his
communications.  The two tactical air-forces had; ours and the R.A.F.
But I wish I could talk over certain things with him.  I'd like to talk
with him and with Ernst Udet.'

'Just tell me what you wish and take this glass of Valpolicella and
stop if it makes you feel badly.  Or don't tell it at all.'

'I was a spare-parts Colonel at the start,' the Colonel explained
carefully.  'They are hang-around Colonels, which are given to a
Division Commander to replace one that he may have killed, or that is
relieved.  Almost none are killed; but many are relieved.  All the good
ones are promoted.  Fairly fast when the thing starts to move sort of
like a forest fire.'

'Go on, please.  Should you take your medicine?'

'The hell with my medicine,' the Colonel said.  'And the hell with
SHAEF.'

'You explained that to me,' the girl said.

'I wish the hell you were a soldier with your straight true brain and
your beauty memory.'

'I would wish to be a soldier if I could fight under you.'

'Never fight under me,' the Colonel said.  'I'm cagey.  But I'm not
lucky.  Napoleon wanted them lucky and he was right.'

'We've had some luck.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'Good and bad.'

'But it was all luck.'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'But you can't fight on luck.  It is just
something that you need.  The people who fought on luck are all
gloriously dead like Napoleon's horse cavalry.'

'Why do you hate cavalry?  Almost all the good boys I know were in the
three good regiments of cavalry, or in the navy.'

'I don't hate anything, Daughter,' the Colonel said, and drank a little
of the light, dry, red wine which was as friendly as the house of your
brother, if you and your brother are good friends.  'I only have a
point of view, arrived at after careful consideration, and an estimate
of their capabilities.'

'Are they not really good?'

'They are worthless,' the Colonel said.  Then remembering to be kind,
added, 'In our time.'

'Every day is a disillusion.'

'No.  Every day is a new and fine illusion.  But you can cut out
everything phoney about the illusion as though you would cut it with a
straight-edge razor.'

'Please never cut me.'

'You're not cut-able.'

'Would you kiss me and hold me tight, and we both look at the Grand
Canal where the light is lovely now, and you tell me more?'

When they were looking out at the Grand Canal where the light was,
indeed, lovely, the Colonel went on, 'I got a regiment because the
Commanding General relieved a boy that I had known since he was
eighteen years old.  He was not a boy any more, of course.  It was too
much regiment for him and it was all the regiment I ever could have
hoped for in this life until I lost it.'  He added, 'Under orders, of
course.'

'How do you lose a regiment?'

'When you are working around to get up on the high ground and all you
would have to do is send in a flag, and they would talk it over and
come out if you were right.  The professionals are very intelligent and
these Krauts were all professionals; not the fanatics.  The phone rings
and somebody calls from Corps who has his orders from Army or maybe
Army Group or maybe even SHAEF, because they read the name of the town
in a newspaper, possibly sent in from Spa, by a correspondent, and the
order is to take it by assault.  It's important because it got into the
newspapers.  You have to take it.

'So you leave one company dead along a draw.  You lose one company
complete and you destroy three others.  The tanks get smacked even as
fast as they could move and they could move fast both ways.

'They hit them one, two, three, four, five.

'Three men usually get out of the five (that are inside) and they run
like broken-field runners that have been shaken loose in a play when
you are in Minnesota and the others are Beloit, Wisconsin.

'Do I bore you?'

'No.  I do not understand the local allusions.  But you can explain
them when you care to.  Please keep on telling me.'

'You get into the town, and some handsome jerk puts an air mission on
you.  This mission might have been ordered and never cancelled.  Let's
give everyone the benefit of the doubt.  I'm just telling you about
things in a general way.  It is better not to be specific and a
civilian wouldn't understand it.  Not even you.

'This air mission does not help much, Daughter.  Because maybe you
cannot stay in the town because you have got too few people in, and by
now, you are digging them out of rubble; or leaving them in rubble.
There are two schools of thought on that.  So they say to take it by
assault.  They repeat this.

'This has been rigidly confirmed by some politician in uniform who has
never killed in his life, except with his mouth over the telephone, or
on paper, nor ever has been hit.  Figure him as our next President if
you want him.  Figure him any way you like.  But figure him and his
people, the whole great business establishment, so far back that the
best way to communicate with them rapidly would be by racing carrier
pigeons.  Except, with the amount of security they maintained for their
proper persons, they would probably have their anti-aircraft shoot the
pigeons down.  If they could hit them.

'So you do it again.  Then I will tell you what it looks like.'

The Colonel looked up at the play of the light on the ceiling.  It was
reflected, in part, from the Canal.  It made strange, but steady
movements, changing, as the current of a trout stream changes, but
remaining, still changing as the sun moved.

Then he looked at his great beauty, with her strange, dark, grown-up
child's face that broke his heart, that he would be leaving before 1335
(that was sure) and he said, 'Let's not talk about the war, Daughter.'

'Please,' she said.  'Please.  Then I will have it all this week.'

'That's a short sentence.  I mean using the word sentence as a jail
sentence.'

'You don't know how long a week can be when you are nineteen.'

'Several times I have known how long an hour can be,' the Colonel said.
'I could tell you how long two minutes and a half can be.'

'Please tell me.'

'Well, I had two days' leave in Paris between the Schnee-Eifel fight
and this one, and due to my friendship with one or two people I was
privileged to be present at some sort of a meeting, where only the
accredited and trusted were present, and General Walter Bedell Smith
explained to all of us how easy the operation that later took the name
of Hurtgen Forest would be.  It was not really Hurtgen Forest.  That
was only a small sector.  It was the Stadtswald and it was where the
German High Command had figured, exactly, to fight after Aachen had
been taken and the road into Germany breached.  I hope I am not boring
you.'

'You never bore me.  Nothing about fighting bores me except lies.'

'You're a strange girl.'

'Yes,' she said.  'I've known that for quite a long time.'

'Would you really like to fight?'

'I don't know if I could do it.  But I could try if you taught me.'

'I'll never teach you.  I'll just tell you anecdotes.'

'Sad stories of the death of kings.'

'No.  GIs somebody christened them.  God how I hate that word and how
it was used.  Comic book readers.  All from some certain place.  Most
of them there unwillingly.  Not all.  But they all read a paper called
"The Stars and Stripes" and you had to get your unit into it, or you
were unsuccessful as a commander.  I was mostly unsuccessful.  I tried
to like the correspondents and there were some very good ones present
at this meeting.  I will not name names because I might omit some fine
ones and that would be unjust.  There were good ones that I don't
remember.  Then, there were draft dodgers, phonies who claimed that
they were wounded if a piece of spent metal ever touched them, people
who wore the purple heart from jeep accidents, insiders, cowards,
liars, thieves and telephone racers.  There were a few deads missing
from this briefing.  They had deads too.  A big percentage.  But none
of the deads were present as I said.  They had women at it though in
wonderful uniforms.'

'But how did you ever marry one?'

'By mistake as I explained before.'

'Go on and tell me.'

'There were more maps in the room than Our Lord could read on his best
day,' the Colonel continued.  'There were the Big Picture, the Semi-Big
Picture and the Super-Big-Picture.  All these people pretended to
understand them, as did the boys with the pointers, a sort of
half-arsed billiard cue that they used for explanation.'

'Don't say rough words.  I don't know, even, what half-arsed means.'

'Shortened, or abbreviated in an inefficient manner,' the Colonel
explained.  'Or deficient as an instrument, or in character.  It's an
old word.  You could probably find it in Sanscrit.'

'Please tell me.'

'What for?  Why should I perpetuate ignominy just with my mouth?'

'I'll write it if you want.  I can write truly what I hear or think.  I
would make mistakes of course.'

'You are a lucky girl if you can write truly what you hear or think.
But don't you ever write one word of this.'

He resumed, 'The place is full of correspondents dressed according to
their taste.  Some are cynical and some are extremely eager.

'To ride herd on them, and to wield the pointers, there is a group of
pistol-slappers.  We call a pistol-slapper a non-fighting man,
disguised in uniform, or you might even call it costume, who gets
excited every time the weapon slaps against his thighs.  Incidentally,
Daughter, the weapon, not the old pistol, the real pistol, has missed
more people in combat than probably any weapon in the world.  Don't
ever let anyone give you one unless you want to hit people on the head
with it in Harry's Bar.'

'I never wanted to hit anyone; except perhaps Andrea.'

'If you ever hit Andrea, hit him with the barrel; not with the butt.
The butt is awfully slow, and it misses and if it lands you get blood
on your hands when you put the gun away.  Also please do not ever hit
Andrea because he is my friend.  I do not think he would be easy to hit
either.'

'No.  I do not think so either.  Please tell me some more about the
meeting, or the assembly.  I think I could recognize a pistol-slapper
now.  But I would like to be checked out more thoroughly.'

'Well, the pistol-slappers, in all the pride of their pistol-slappery,
were awaiting the arrival of the great General who was to explain the
operation.

'The correspondents were muttering, or twittering, and the intelligent
ones were glum or passively cheerful.  Everybody sat on folding chairs
as for a Chautauqua lecture.  I'm sorry about these local terms; but we
are a local people.

'In comes the General.  He is no pistol-slapper, but a big business
man; an excellent politician, the executive type.  The Army is the
biggest business, at that moment, in the world.  He takes the
half-assed pointer, and he shows us, with complete conviction, and
without forebodings, exactly what the attack will be, why we are making
it, and how facilely it will succeed.  There is no problem.'

'Go on,' the girl said.  'Please let me fill your glass and you, please
look at the light on the ceiling.'

'Fill it and I'll look at the light and I will go on.

'This high pressure salesman, and I say this with no disrespect, but
with admiration for all his talents, or his talent, also told what we
would have of the necessary.  There would be no lack of anything.  The
organization called SHAEF was then based on a town named Versailles
outside of Paris.  We would attack to the east of Aachen a distance of
some 380 kilometres from where they were based.

'An army can get to be huge; but you can close up a little bit.  They
finally went as far forward as Rheims which was 240 kilometres from the
fighting.  That was many months later.

'I understand the necessity of the big executive being removed from
contact with his working people.  I understand about the size of the
army and the various problems.  I even understand logistics which is
not difficult.  But no one ever commanded from that far back in
history.'

'Tell me about the town.'

'I'll tell you,' the Colonel said.  'But I don't want to hurt you.'

'You never hurt me.  We are an old town and we had fighting men,
always.  We respect them more than all others and I hope we understand
them a little.  We also know they are difficult.  Usually, as people,
they are very boring to women.'

'Do I bore you?'

'What do you think?' the girl asked.

'I bore myself, Daughter.'

'I don't think you do, Richard, you would not have done something all
your life if you were bored by it.  Don't lie to me, please, darling,
when we have so little time.

'I won't.'

'Don't you see you need to tell me things to purge your bitterness?'

'I know I tell them to you.'

'Don't you know I want you to die with the grace of a happy death?  Oh,
I'm getting all mixed up.  Don't let me get too mixed up.'

'I won't, Daughter.'

'Tell me some more, please, and be just as bitter as you want.'




Chapter XXXI

'Listen, Daughter,' the Colonel said.  'Now we will cut out all
references to glamour and to high brass, even from Kansas, where the
brass grows higher than osage-orange trees along your own road.  It
bears a fruit you can't eat and it is purely Kansan.  Nobody but
Kansans ever had anything to do with it; except maybe us who fought.
We ate them every day.  Osage oranges,' he added.  'Only we called them
K Rations.  They weren't bad.  C Rations were bad.  Ten in ones were
good.

'So we fought.  It is dull but it is informative.  This is the way it
goes if anyone is ever interested; which I doubt.

'It goes like this: 1300 Red S-3: White jumped off in time.  Red said
they were waiting to tie in behind White.  1305 (that is one o'clock
and five minutes after in the afternoon, if you can remember that,
Daughter) Blue S-3, you know what an S-3 is, I hope, says, "Let us know
when you move."  Red said they were waiting to tie in behind White.

'You can see how easy it is,' the Colonel told the girl.  'Everybody
ought to do it before breakfast.'

'We cannot all be combat infantrymen,' the girl told him softly.  'I
respect it more than anything except good, honest fliers.  Please talk,
I'm taking care of you.'

'Good fliers are very good and should be respected as such,' the
Colonel said.

He looked up at the light on the ceiling and he was completely
desperate at the remembrance of his loss of his battalions, and of
individual people.  He could never hope to have such a regiment, ever.
He had not built it.  He had inherited it.  But, for a time, it had
been his great joy.  Now every second man in it was dead and the others
nearly all were wounded.  In the belly, the head, the feet or the
hands, the neck, the back, the lucky buttocks, the unfortunate chest
and the other places.  Tree burst wounds hit men where they would never
be wounded in open country.  And all the wounded were wounded for life.

'It was a good regiment,' he said.  'You might even say it was a
beautiful regiment until I destroyed it under other people's orders.'

'But why do you have to obey them when you know better?'

'In our army you obey like a dog,' the Colonel explained.  'You always
hope you have a good master.'

'What kind of masters do you get?'

'I've only had two good ones so for.  After I reached a certain level
of command, many nice people, but only two good masters.'

'Is that why you are not a General now?  I would love it if you were a
General.'

'I'd love it too,' the Colonel said.  'But maybe not with the same
intensity.'

'Would you try to sleep, please, to please me?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.

'You see, I thought that if you slept you might get rid of them, just
being asleep.'

'Yes.  Thank you very much,' he said.

There was nothing to it, gentlemen.  All a man need ever do is obey.




Chapter XXXII

'You slept quite well for a time,' the girl told him, lovingly and
gently.  'Is there anything you would like me to do?'

'Nothing,' the Colonel said.  'Thank you.'

Then he turned bad and he said, 'Daughter, I could sleep good straight
up and down in the electric chair with my pants slit and my hair
clipped.  I sleep as, and when, I need it.'

'I can never be like that,' the girl said, sleepily.  'I sleep when I
am sleepy.'

'You're lovely,' the Colonel told her.  'And you sleep better than
anyone ever slept.'

'I am not proud of it,' the girl said, very sleepily.  'It is just
something that I do.'

'Do it, please.'

'No.  Tell me very low and soft and put your bad hand in mine.'

'The hell with my bad hand,' the Colonel said.  'Since when was it so
bad?'

'It's bad,' the girl said.  'Badder, or worse, than you will ever know.
Please tell me about combat without being too brutal.'

'An easy assignment,' the Colonel said.  'I'll skip the times.  The
weather is cloudy and the place is 986342.  What's the situation?  We
are smoking the enemy with artillery and mortar.  S-3 advises that S-6
wants Red to button up by 1700.  S-6 wants you to button up and use
plenty of artillery.  White reports that they are in fair shape.  S-6
informs that A company will swing around and tie in with B.

'B Company was stopped first by enemy action and stayed there of their
own accord.  S-6 isn't doing so good.  This is unofficial.  He wants
more artillery but there isn't any more artillery.

'You wanted combat for what?  I don't know really why.  Or really know
why.  Who wants true combat?  But here it is, Daughter, on the
telephone and later I will put in the sounds and smells and anecdotes
about who was killed when and where if you want them.'

'I only want what you will tell me.'

'I'll tell you how it was,' the Colonel said, 'and General Walter
Bedell Smith doesn't know how it was yet.  Though, probably, I am
wrong, as I have been so many times.'

'I'm glad we don't have to know him or the nylon-smooth man,' the girl
said.

'We won't have to know them this side of hell,' the Colonel assured
her.  'And I will have a detail guarding the gates of hell so that no
such characters enter.'

'You sound like Dante,' she said sleepily.

'I am Mister Dante,' he said.  'For the moment.'

And for a while he was and he drew all the circles.  They were as
unjust as Dante's but he drew them.




Chapter XXXIII

'I will skip the detailed part since you are, justifiably, and should
be, sleepy,' the Colonel said.  He watched, again, the strange play of
the light on the ceiling.  Then he looked at the girl, who was more
beautiful than any girl that he had ever seen, ever.

He had seen them come and go, and they go faster, when they go, than
any other thing that flies.  They can go faster from fair beauty to the
knocker's shop than any other animal, he thought.  But I believe that
this one could hold the pace and stay the course.  The dark ones last
the best, he thought, and looked at the bony structure in that face.
This one has a fine blood line too, and she can go for ever.  Most of
our own lovely beauties come from soda counters, and they do not know
their grandfather's last name, unless, maybe, it was Schultz.  Or
Schlitz, he thought.

This is the wrong attitude to take, he said to himself; since he did
not wish to express any of these sentiments to the girl, who would not
like them anyway, and was soundly sleepy now the way a cat is when it
sleeps within itself.

'Sleep well, my dearest lovely, and I will just tell it for nothing.'

The girl was asleep, still holding his bad hand, that he despised, and
he could feel her breathe, as the young breathe when they are easily
asleep.

The Colonel told her all about it; but he did not utter it.

So after I had the privilege of hearing General Walter Bedell Smith
explain the facility of the attack, we made it.  There was the Big Red
One, who believed their own publicity.  There was the Ninth, which was
a better Division than we were.  There was us, who had always done it
when they asked for you to do it.

We had no time to read comic books, and we had no time for practically
nothing, because we always moved before first light.  This is difficult
and you have to throw away the Big Picture and be a division.

We wore a four-leaf clover, which meant nothing except among ourselves,
who all loved it.  And every time I ever see it the same thing happens
in my inner guts.  Some people thought that it was ivy.  But it was
not.  It was a four-leaf clover disguised as ivy.

The orders were that we would attack with the Big Red One, the First
Infantry Division of the Army of the United States, and they, and their
Calypso singing PRO never let you forget it.  He was a nice guy.  And
it was his job.

But you get fed up with horse-dung unless you like the aroma or the
taste.  I never liked it.  Although I loved to walk through cow-dung
when I was a kid and feel it between my toes.  But horse-dung bores
you.  It bores me very rapidly, and I can detect it at over one
thousand yards.

So we attacked, the three of us in line, exactly where the Germans
wished us to attack.  We will not mention General Walter Bedell Smith
any further.  He is not the villain.  He only made the promises and
explained how it would go.  There are no villains, I presume, in a
Democracy.  He was only just as wrong as hell.  Period, he added in his
mind.

The patches had all been removed even as far back as the rear echelon
so that no Kraut would know that it was us, the three he knew so well,
who were going to attack.  We were going to attack with the three of us
in line and nothing in reserve.  I won't try to explain what that
means, Daughter.  But it isn't any good.  And the place we were going
to fight in, which I had taken a good look at, was going to be
Passchendaele with tree bursts.  I say that too much.  But I think it
too much.

The poor bloody twenty-eighth which was up on our right had been bogged
down for some time and so there was pretty accurate information
available about what conditions in those woods were going to be like.
I think we could conservatively describe them as unfavourable.

Then we were ordered to commit one regiment before the attack started.
That means that the enemy will get at least one prisoner which makes
all the taking off of the Divisional patches silly.  They would be
waiting for the old four-leaf clover people who would go straight to
hell like a mule and do it for one hundred and five days.  Figures of
course mean nothing to civilians.  Nor to the characters from SHAEF we
never saw in those woods.  Incidentally, and of course these
occurrences are always incidental at the SHAEF level, the regiment was
destroyed.  It was no one's bloody fault, especially not the fault of
the man who commanded it.  He was a man I would be glad to spend half
my time in hell with; and may yet.

It certainly would be odd if instead of going to hell, as we always
counted on, we should go to one of those Kraut joints like Valhalla and
not be able to get along with the people.  But maybe we could get a
corner table with Rommel and Udet and it would be just like any
winter-sports hotel.  It will probably be hell though and I don't even
believe in hell.

Well anyway this regiment was rebuilt as American regiments always are
by the replacement system.  I won't describe it since you can always
read about it in a book by somebody who was a replacement.  It boils
down, or distils, to the fact you stay in until you are hit badly or
killed or go crazy and get section-eighted.  But I guess it is logical
and as good as any other, given the difficulties of transport.  However
it leaves a core of certain un-killed characters who know what the
score is and no one of these characters liked the look of these woods
much.

You could sum up their attitude In this phrase, 'Don't ---- me, Jack.'

And since I had been an un-killed character for around twenty-eight
years I could understand their attitude.  But they were soldiers, so
most of them got killed in those woods and when we took the three towns
that looked so innocent and were really fortresses.  They were just
built to tempt us and we had no word on them at all.  To continue to
use the silly parlance of my trade: this could or could not be faulty
intelligence.

'I feel terribly about the regiment,' the girl said.  She had wakened
and spoken straight from sleep.

'Yes,' said the Colonel.  'So do I.  Let's drink to it once.  Then you
go to sleep, Daughter, please.  The war is over and forgotten.'

Please don't think that I am conceited, Daughter, he said, without
speaking.  His true love was sleeping again.  She slept in a different
way than his career girl had slept.  He did not like to remember how
the career girl slept, yet he did.  But he wanted to forget it.  She
did not sleep pretty, he thought.  Not like this girl who slept as
though she were awake and alive; except she was asleep.  Please sleep
well, he thought.

Who the hell are you to criticize career girls?  he thought.  What
miserable career did you attempt and have failed at?

I wished to be, and was, a General Officer in the Army of the United
States.  I have failed and I speak badly of all who have succeeded.

Then his contrition did not last, and he said to himself, 'Except the
brown-nosers, the five and ten and twenty percenters and all the jerks
from wherever who never fought and hold commands.'

They killed several men from the Academy at Gettysburg.  That was the
big kill day of all kill days, when there was a certain amount of
opposition by both sides.

Don't be bitter.  They killed General McNair by mistake the day the
Valhalla Express came over.  Quit being bitter.  People from the
Academy were killed and there are statistics to prove it.

How can I remember if I am not bitter?

Be as bitter as you want.  And tell the girl, now silently, and that
will not hurt her, ever, because she is sleeping so lovely.  He said
lovely to himself since his thinking was often un-grammatical.




Chapter XXXIV

Sleep softly, my true love, and when you wake, this will be over and I
will joke you out of trying to learn details of the _triste metier_ of
war and we will go to buy the little negro, or moor, carved in ebony
with his fine features and his jewelled turban.  Then you will pin him
on and we will go to have a drink at Harry's and see whoever or
whatever of our friends that will be afoot at that hour.

We will lunch at Harry's, or we'll come back here and I will be packed.
We will say good-bye and I will get into the _motoscafo_ with Jackson
and make some cheerful crack to the _Gran Maestro_ and wave to any
other members of the Order and ten to one, the way I feel right now, or
two will get you thirty, we will not ever see one another again.

Hell, he said to no one and certainly not aloud, I've felt this way
before many fights and almost always at some time in the fall of the
year and always when leaving Paris.  Probably it doesn't mean a thing.

Who gives a damn anyway except me and the _Gran Maestro_ and this girl;
I mean at command level.

I give very much of a damn myself.  But I certainly should be trained
and adjusted by this time not to give a much for nothing; like the
definition of a whore.  A woman who does not, etc.

But we won't think about that boy, lieutenant, captain, major, colonel,
general, sir.  We will just lay it on the line once more and the hell
with it and with its ugly face that old Hieronymus Bosch really
painted.  But you can sheathe your scythe, old brother death, if you
have got a sheath for it.  Or, he added, thinking of Hurtgen now, you
can take your scythe and stick it.

It was Passchendaele with tree bursts, he told nobody except the wonder
light on the ceiling.  Then he looked at the girl, to see that she was
sleeping well enough so even his thoughts would not hurt her.

Then he looked at the portrait and he thought, I have her in two
positions, lying down, turned a little on her side and looking at me
straight in front.  I'm a lucky son of a bitch and I should never be
sad about anything.




Chapter XXXV

The first day there, we lost the three battalion commanders.  One
killed in the first twenty minutes and the other two hit later.  This
is only a statistic to a journalist.  But good battalion commanders
have never yet grown on trees; not even Christmas trees which was the
basic tree of that woods.  I do not know how many times we lost company
commanders how many times over.  But I could look it up.

They aren't made, nor grown, as fast as a crop of potatoes is either.
We got a certain amount of replacements but I can remember thinking
that it would be simpler and more effective, to shoot them in the area
where they de-trucked, than to have to try to bring them back from
where they would be killed and bury them.  It takes men to bring them
back and gasoline and men to bury them.  These men might just as well
be fighting and get killed too.

There was snow, or something, rain or fog, all the times and the roads
had been mined as many as fourteen mines deep in certain stretches, so
when the vehicles churned down to a new string deeper, in another part
of the mud, you were always losing vehicles and, of course, the people
that went with them.

Besides just mortaring it all to hell and having all the fire-lanes
taped for machine-gun and automatic weapon fire, they had the whole
thing worked out and canalized so however you out-thought them you ran
right into it.  They also shelled you with heavy artillery fire and
with at least one railway gun.

It was a place where it was extremely difficult for a man to stay alive
even if all he did was be there.  And we were attacking all the time
and every day.

Let's not think about it.  The hell with it.  Maybe two things I will
think about and get rid of them.  One was a bare-assed piece of hill
that you had to cross to get into Grosshau.

Just before you had to make this run, which was under observation with
fires by 88s, there was a little piece of dead ground where they could
only hit you with a howitzer, only interdicting fires, or, from the
right by mortar.  When we cleaned it up we found they had good
observation for their mortars there too.

This was a comparatively safe place, I'm really not lying, not me nor
anybody eke.  You can't fool those that were in Hurtgen and if you lied
they would know it the minute you opened your mouth, Colonel or no
Colonel.

We met a truck at this place and slowed up, and he had the usual grey
face and he said, 'Sir, there is a dead G.I. in the middle of the road
up ahead and every time any vehicle goes through they have to run over
him and I'm afraid it is making a bad impression on the troops.'

'We'll get him off the road.'

So we got him off the road.

And I can remember just how he felt, lifting him, and how he had been
flattened and the strangeness of his flatness.

Then there was one other thing, I remember.  We had put an awful lot of
white phosphorus on the town before we got in for good, or whatever you
would call it.  That was the first time I ever saw a German dog eating
a roasted German Kraut.  Later on I saw a cat working on him too.  It
was a hungry cat, quite nice looking, basically.  You wouldn't think a
good German cat would eat a good German soldier, would you, Daughter?
Or a good German dog eat a good German soldier's ass which had been
roasted by white phosphorus.

How many could you tell like that?  Plenty, and what good would they
do?  You could tell a thousand and they would not prevent war.  People
would say we are not fighting the Krauts and besides the cat did not
eat me nor my brother Gordon, because he was in the Pacific.  Maybe
land crabs ate Gordon.  Or maybe he just deliquesced.

In Hurtgen they just froze up hard; and it was so cold they froze up
with ruddy faces.  Very strange.  They all were grey and yellow like
wax-works, in the summer.  But once the winter really came they had
ruddy faces.

Real soldiers never tell anyone what their own dead looked like, he
told the portrait.  And I'm through with this whole subject.  And what
about that company dead up the draw?  What about them, professional
soldier?

They're dead, he said.  And I can hang and rattle.

Now who would join me in a glass of Valpolicella?  What time do you
think I should wake your opposite number, you girl?  We have to get to
that jewellery place.  And I look forward to making jokes and to
talking of the most cheerful things.

What's cheerful, portrait?  You ought to know.  You're smarter than I
am, although you haven't been around as much.

All right, canvas girl, the Colonel told her, not saying it aloud,
we'll drop the whole thing and in eleven minutes I will wake the live
girl up and we will go out on the town and be cheerful and leave you
here to be wrapped.

I didn't mean to be rude.  I was just joking roughly.  I don't wish to
be rude ever because I will be living with you from now on.  I hope, he
added, and drank a glass of the wine.




Chapter XXXVI

It was a sharp, cold bright day and they stood outside the window of
the jeweller's shop and studied the two small negro heads and torsos
that were carved to ebony and adorned with studded jewels.  One was as
good as the other, the Colonel thought.

'Which do you like the best, Daughter?'

'I think the one on the right.  Don't you think he has the nicer face?'

'They both have nice faces.  But I think I would rather have him attend
you if it was the old days.'

'Good.  We'll take him.  Let's go in and see them.  I must ask the
price.'

'I will go in.'

'No, let me ask the price.  They will charge me less than they would
charge you.  After all you are a rich American.'

'_Et toi_, Rimbaud?'

'You'd make an awfully funny Verlalne,' the girl told him.  'We'll be
some other famous characters.'

'Go on to, Majesty, and we'll buy the God-damn jewel.'

'You wouldn't make a very good Louis XVI either.'

'I'd get up to that tumbril with you and still be able to spit.'

'Let's forget all the tumbrils and everyone's sorrows and buy the small
object and then we can walk to Cipriani's and be famous people.'

Inside the shop they looked at the two heads and she asked the price
and then, there was some very rapid talk and the price was much lower.
But still it was more money than the Colonel had.

'I'll go to Cipriani's and get some money.'

'No,' the girl said.  Then to the clerk, 'Put it in a box and send it
to Cipriani's and say the Colonel said to pay for it and hold it for
him.'

'Please,' the clerk said.  'Exactly as you say.'

They went out into the street and the sunlight and the unremitting wind.

'By the way,' the Colonel said.  'Your stones are in the safe at the
Gritti in your name.'

'Your stones.'

'No,' he told her, not rough, but to make her understand truly.  'There
are some things that a person cannot do.  You know about that.  You
cannot marry me and I understand that, although I do not approve it.'

'Very well,' the girl said.  'I understand.  But would you take one for
a lucky stone?'

'No.  I couldn't.  They are too valuable.'

'But the portrait has value.'

'That is different.'

'Yes,' she agreed.  'I suppose so.  I think I begin to understand.'

'I would accept a horse from you, if I was poor and young and riding
very well.  But I could not take a motor car.'

'I understand it now very well.  Where can we go now, at this minute,
where you can kiss me?'

'In this side alley, if you know no one who lives in it.'

'I don't care who lives in it.  I want to feel you hold me tight and
kiss me.'

They turned into the side street and walked towards its blind end.

'Oh, Richard,' she said.  'Oh, my dear.'

'I love you.'

'Please love me.'

'I do.'

The wind had blown her hair up and around his neck and he kissed her
once more with it beating silkily against both his cheeks.

Then she broke away, suddenly and hard, and looked at him and said, 'I
suppose we had better go to Harry's.'

'I suppose so.  Do you want to play historical personages?'

'Yes,' she said.  'Let us play that you are you and I am me.'

'Let's play,' the Colonel said.




Chapter XXXVII

There was no one in Harry's except some early morning drinkers that the
Colonel did not know and two men that were doing business at the back
of the bar.

There were hours at Harry's when it filled with the people that you
knew, with the same rushing regularity as the tide coming in at Mont
St. Michel.  Except, the Colonel thought, the hours of the tides change
each day with the moon and the hours at Harry's are as the Greenwich
Meridian, or the standard metre in Paris, or the good opinion the
French military hold of themselves.

'Do you know any of these morning drinkers?' he asked the girl.

'No.  I am not a morning drinker so I have never met them.'

'They will be swept out when the tide comes in.'

'No.  They will leave, just as it comes, of their own accord.'

'Do you mind being here out of season?'

'Did you think I was a snob because I come from an old family?  We're
the ones who are not snobs.  The snobs are what you call jerks and the
people with all the new money.  Did you ever see so much new money?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I saw it in Kansas City when I used to come
in from Fort Riley to play polo at the Country Club.'

'Was it as bad as here?'

'No, it was quite pleasant.  I liked it and that part of Kansas City is
very beautiful.'

'Is it really?  I wish that we could go there.  Do they have the camps
there too?  The ones that we are going to stay at?'

'Surely.  But we'll stay at the Muehlebach hotel which has the biggest
beds in the world and we'll pretend that we are oil millionaires.'

'Where will we leave the Cadillac?'

'Is it a Cadillac now?'

'Yes.  Unless you want to take the big Buick Roadmaster, with the
Dynaflow drive.  I've driven it all over Europe.  It was in that last
_Vogue_ you sent me.'

'We'd probably better just use one at a time,' the Colonel said.
'Whichever one we decide to use we will park in the garage alongside
the Muehlebach.'

'Is the Muehlebach very splendid?'

'Wonderful.  You'll love it.  When we leave town we'll drive north to
St. Joe and have a drink in the bar at the Roubidoux, maybe two drinks
and then we will cross the river and go west.  You can drive and we can
spell each other.'

'What is that?'

'Take turns driving.'

'I'm driving now.'

'Let's skip the dull part and get to Chimney Rock and go on to Scott's
Bluff and Torrington and after that you will begin to see it.'

'I have the road maps and the guides and that man who says where to eat
and the A.A.A. guide to the camps and the hotels.'

'Do you work on this much?'

'I work at it in the evenings, with the things you sent me.  What kind
of a licence will we have?'

'Missouri.  We'll buy the car in Kansas City.  We fly to Kansas City,
don't you remember?  Or we can go on a really good train.'

'I thought we flew to Albuquerque.'

'That was another time.'

'Will we stop early in the afternoons at the best Hotel in the A.A.A.
book and I make you any drinks you want while you read the paper and
_Life_ and _Time_ and _Newsweek_ and I will read the new fresh _Vogue_
and _Harper's Bazaar_?

'Yes.  But we come back here, too.'

'Of course.  With our car.  On an Italian liner; whichever one is best
then.  We drive straight here from Genoa.'

'You don't want to stop anywhere for the night?'

'Why?  We want to get home to our own house.'

'Where will our house be?'

'We can decide that any time.  There are always plenty of houses in
this town.  Would you like to live in the country too?'

'Yes,' said the Colonel.  'Why not?'

'Then we could see the trees when we woke up.  What sort of trees will
we see on this journey?'

'Pine mostly and cotton-wood along the creeks and aspen.  Wait till you
see the aspen turn yellow in the fall.'

'I'm waiting.  Where will we stay in Wyoming?'

'We'll go to Sheridan first and then decide.'

'Is Sheridan nice?'

'It's wonderful.  In the car we'll drive to where they had the
Wagon-Box Fight and I'll tell you about it.  We will drive up, on the
way to Billings, to where they killed that fool George Armstrong Custer
and you can see the markers where everybody died and I'll explain the
fight to you.'

'That will be wonderful.  Which is Sheridan more like; Mantova or
Verona or Vicenza?'

'It isn't like any of those.  It is right up against the mountains,
almost like Schio.'

'Is it like Cortina then?'

'Nothing like.  Cortina is in a high valley in the mountains.  Sheridan
lays right up against them.  There aren't any foothills to the Big
Horns.  They rise high out of the plateau.  You can see Cloud's Peak.'

'Will our cars climb them properly?'

'You're damn right they will.  But I would much rather not have any
hydromatic drive.'

'I can do without it,' the girl said.  Then she held herself straight
and hard not to cry.  'As I can do without everything else.'

'What are you drinking?' the Colonel said.  'We haven't even ordered
yet.'

'I don't think I will drink anything.'

'Two very dry Martinis,' the Colonel said to the bartender, 'and a
glass of cold water.'

He reached into his pocket and unscrewed the top of the medicine bottle
and shook two of the big tablets into his left hand.  With them in his
hand, he screwed the top back on the bottle.  It was no feat for a man
with a bad right hand.

'I said I didn't want to drink anything.'

'I know, Daughter.  But I thought you might need one.  We can leave it
on the bar.  Or I can drink it myself.  Please,' he said.  'I did not
mean to be brusque.'

'We haven't asked for the little negro that will look after me.'

'No.  Because I did not want to ask for him until Cipriani came in and
I could pay for him.'

'Is everything that rigid?'

'With me, I guess,' the Colonel said.  'I'm sorry, Daughter.'

'Say daughter three times straight.'

'_Hija, figlia_, Daughter.'

'I don't know,' she said.  'I think we should just leave here.  I love
to have people see us, but I don't want to see anybody.'

'The box with the negro in it is on top of the cash register.'

'I know.  I've seen it for some time.'

The bar-tender came, with the two drinks, frost cold from the chilled
coldness of the glasses and he brought the glass of water.

'Give me that small packet that came in my name and is on top of the
cash register,' the Colonel said to him.  'Tell Cipriani I will send
him a cheque for it.'

He had made another decision.

'Do you want your drink, Daughter?'

'Yes.  If you don't mind me changing my mind too.'

They drank, after touching glasses very lightly, so lightly that the
contact was almost imperceptible.

'You were right,' she said, feeling its warmth and its momentary
destruction of sorrow.

'You were right too,' he said, and palmed the two tablets.

He thought taking them with the water now, was in bad taste.  So, when
the girl turned her head a moment to watch a morning drinker go out to
the door, he swallowed them with the Martini.

'Should we go, Daughter?'

'Yes.  By all means.'

'Bar-tender,' the Colonel said.  'How much are these drinks?  And do
not forget to tell Cipriani I am sending him a cheque for this
nonsense.'




Chapter XXXVIII

They ate lunch at the Gritti and the girl had unwrapped the small ebony
negro's head and torso and pinned it high on her left shoulder.  It was
about three inches long and was quite lovely to look at if you liked
that sort of thing.  And if you don't you are stupid, the Colonel
thought.

But do not even think rough, he told himself.  You have to be good now
in every way until you say good-bye.  What a word, he thought, good-bye.

It sounds like a Valentine slogan.

Good-bye and _bonne chance_ and _hasta la vista_.  We always just said
_merde_ and let it go at that.  Farewell, he thought, that is a nice
word.  It sings well, he thought.  Farewell, a long farewell and take
it with you where you go.  With handles, he thought.

'Daughter,' he said.  'How long has it been since I told you that I
loved you?'

'Not since we sat at the table.'

'I tell you now.'

She had combed her hair with patience when they came into the hotel and
she had gone into the room for women.  She disliked such rooms.

She had used lipstick to make the sort of mouth she knew he most
desired and she had said to herself, making the mouth correctly, 'Don't
think at all.  Don't think.  Above all don't be sad because he is going
now.'

'You look beautiful.'

'Thank you.  I would like to be beautiful for you if I could and if I
could be beautiful.'

'Italian is a lovely language.'

'Yes.  Mister Dante thought so.'

'_Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.  'What is there to eat in this
_Wirtschaft_?'

The _Gran Maestro_ had been observing, without observing, with
affection and without envy.

'Do you want meat, or fish?'

'It's Saturday,' the Colonel said.  'Fish is not compulsory.  So I'll
take it.'

'It is sole,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'What do you want, my Lady?'

'Whatever you decide.  You know more about food than I do and I like it
all.'

'Make a decision, Daughter.'

'No.  I would rather leave it to someone who knows more than me.  I
have a boarding-school appetite.'

'It will come as a surprise,' the _Gran Maestro_ said with his long and
loving face with the grey eyebrows over the softly hooded eyes and the
ever happy face of the old soldier who is still alive and appreciates
it.

'Is there any news from the Order?' the Colonel asked.

'Only that our leader, Himself, is in trouble.  They have confiscated
everything he owns.  Or at any rate they have intervened.'

'I hope it is not serious.'

'We will have confidence in our leader.  He has ridden out worse
tempests than this.'

'To our leader,' the Colonel said.

He raised his glass, which had been filled with the decanted new and
true Valpolicella.  'Drink to him, Daughter.'

'I can't drink to that swine,' the girl said.  'Besides I do not belong
to the Order.'

'You are a member now,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  '_Por merito di
guerra_.'

'I'll drink to him then,' she said.  'Am I really a member of the
Order?'

'Yes,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'You have not received your parchment
yet but I appoint you Super Honorary Secretary.  My Colonel will reveal
to you the secrets of the Order.  Reveal, please, my Colonel.'

'I reveal', the Colonel said.  'There are no pitted folk about?'

'No.  He is out with his Lady.  Miss Baedeker.'

'O.K.  then,' the Colonel said.  'I will reveal.  There is only the
major secret that you must know.  Correct me, _Gran Maestro_, if I fall
into error.'

'Proceed to reveal,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

'I proceed to reveal,' the Colonel said.  'Listen carefully, Daughter.
This is the Supreme Secret.  Listen.  'Love is love and fun is fun.
But it is always so quiet when the gold fish die.'

'It has been revealed,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

'I am very proud and happy to be a member of the Order,' the girl said.
'But it is, in a way, a rather rough Order.'

'It is indeed,' the Colonel said.  'And now, _Gran Maestro_, what do we
actually eat; without mysteries?'

'Some crab _enchillada_, in the style of this town, but cold, first.
Served in the shell.  Then sole for you and for my lady a mixed grill.
What vegetables?'

'Whatever you have,' the Colonel said.

The _Gran Maestro_ was gone and the Colonel looked at the girl and then
at the Grand Canal outside the window and he saw the magic spots and
changes of light that were even here, in the end of the bar, which had
now by skilful handling been made into a dining-room, and he said, 'Did
I tell you, Daughter, that I love you?'

'You haven't told me for quite a long time.  But I love you.'

'What happens to people that love each other?'

'I suppose they have whatever they have and they are more fortunate
than others.  Then one of them gets the emptiness for ever.'

'I won't be rough,' the Colonel said.  'I could have made a rough
response.  But please don't have any emptiness.'

'I'll try,' the girl said.  'I've been trying ever since I woke up.
I've tried ever since we knew each other.'

'Keep on trying, Daughter,' the Colonel said.

Then to the Grand Maestro, who had reappeared, having given his orders,
the Colonel said, 'A bottle of that _vino secco_, from Vesuvius, for
the small soles.  We have the Valpolicella for the other things.'

'Can't I drink the Vesuvius wine with my mixed grill?' the girl asked.

'Renata, Daughter,' the Colonel said.  'Of course.  You can do
anything.'

'I like to drink the same wines as you if I drink wine.'

'Good white wine is good with a mixed grill, at your age,' the Colonel
told her.

'I wish there was not such a difference in ages.'

'I like it very much,' the Colonel said.  'Except,' he added.  Then he
did not continue and said, 'Let's be _fraîche et rose comme au jour de
bataille_.'

'Who said that?'

'I haven't the slightest idea.  I picked it up when I took a course at
the _Collège des Maréchaux_.  A rather pretentious title.  But I
graduated.  What I know best I learned from the Krauts, studying them
and opposing them.  They are the best soldiers.  But they always
over-reach.'

'Let's be like you said and please tell me that you love me.'

'I love you,' he said.  'That's what you can base on.  I tell you
truly.'

'It is Saturday,' she said.  'And when is next Saturday?'

'Next Saturday is a movable feast, Daughter.  Find me a man who can
tell me about next Saturday.'

'You could tell me if you would.'

'I'll ask the _Gran Maestro_, maybe he knows.  _Gran Maestro_, when
will next Saturday come?'

'_A Pâques ou à la Trinité_,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

'Why don't we have any smells from the kitchen to cheer us up?'

'Because the wind is from the wrong direction.'

Yes, the Colonel thought.  The wind is from the wrong direction and how
lucky I would have been to have had this girl instead of the woman that
I pay alimony to, who could not even make a child.  She hired out for
that.  But who should criticize whose tubes?  I only criticize Goodrich
or Firestone or General.

Keep it clean, he said to himself.  And love your girl.

She was there beside him, wishing to be loved, if he had any love to
give.

It came back, as it always had, when he saw her and he said, 'How are
you with the crow wing hair and the break-heart face?'

'I'm fine.'

'_Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.  'Produce a few smells or something
from your off-stage kitchen, even if the wind is against us.'




Chapter XXXIX

The hall porter had telephoned, under the direction of the concierge,
and it was the same motor boat that they had ridden in before.

T5 Jackson was in the boat with the luggage and the portrait, which had
been well and sturdily wrapped.  It was still blowing hard.

The Colonel had paid his bill and made the proper tips.  The people of
the hotel had put the luggage and the picture in the boat and seen that
Jackson was seated properly.  Then they had retired.

'Well, Daughter,' the Colonel said.

'Can't I ride with you to the garage?'

'It would be just as bad at the garage.'

'Please let me ride to the garage.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'It's your show, really.  Get in.'

They did not talk at all and the wind was a stern wind so that, with
what speed the old calamity of a motor made, there seemed almost to be
no wind at all.

At the landing place, where Jackson was handing the luggage to a porter
and looking after the portrait himself, the Colonel said, 'Do you want
to say good-bye here?'

'Do I have to?'

'No.'

'May I come up to the bar in the garage while they are getting the car
down?'

'That will be worse.'

'I do not care.'

'Get that stuff up to the garage and have somebody look after it until
you get the car down,' the Colonel said to Jackson.  'Check on my guns
and pack this stuff in a way to give the maximum space in the rear
seat.'

'Yes, sir,' Jackson said.

'Am I going then?' the girl asked.

'No,' the Colonel told her.

'Why can't I go?'

'You know very well.  You weren't invited.'

'Please don't be bad.'

'Christ, Daughter, if you knew how hard I am trying not to be.  It's
easy if you're bad.  Let's pay this good man off and go over and sit on
the bench there under the tree.'

He paid the owner of the motor boat and told him that he had not
forgotten about the jeep engine.  He also told him not to count on it,
but that there was a good chance that he could get it.

'It will be a used engine.  But it will be better than that coffee pot
you have in there now.'

They went up the worn stone steps and walked across the gravel and sat
on a bench under the trees.

The trees were black and moved in the wind and there were no leaves on
them.  The leaves had fallen early that year and been swept up long ago.

A man came over to offer postcards for sale and the Colonel told him,
'Run along, son.  We don't need you now.'

The girl was crying, finally, although she had made the decision never
to cry.

'Look, Daughter,' the Colonel said.  'There isn't anything to say.
They didn't instal shock-absorbers in this vehicle we ride in now.'

'I've stopped,' she said.  'I'm not an hysterical.'

'I wouldn't say you were.  I'd say you were the loveliest and most
beautiful girl that ever lived.  Any time.  Any place.  Anywhere.'

'If it were true, what difference would it make?'

'You have me there,' the Colonel said.  'But it is true.'

'So now what?'

'So now we stand up and kiss each other and say good-bye.'

'What's that?'

'I don't know,' the Colonel said.  'I guess that is one of the things
everybody has to figure out for themselves.'

'I'll try to figure it.'

'Just take it as easy as you can, Daughter.'

'Yes,' the girl said.  'In the vehicle without the shock-absorbers.'

'You were tumbril bait from the start.'

'Can't you do anything kindly?'

'I guess not.  But I've tried.'

'Please keep on trying.  That's all the hope we have.'

'I'll keep on trying.'

So they held each other close and kissed each other hard and true and
the Colonel took the girl across the stretch of gravel and down the
stone steps.

'You ought to take a good one.  Not that old displaced engine boat.'

'I'd rather take the displaced engine boat if you don't mind.'

'Mind?' the Colonel said.  'Not me.  I only give orders and obey
orders.  I don't mind.  Good-bye, my dear, lovely, beautiful.'

'Good-bye,' she said.




Chapter XL

He was in the sunken oak hogshead that they used in the Veneto for
blinds.  A blind is any artifice you use to hide the shooter from that
which he is attempting to shoot, which, in this case, were ducks.

It had been a good trip out with the boys, once they had met in the
garage and a good evening with excellent food cooked on the old
open-hearth kitchen.  Three shooters rode in the rear seat, on the way
to the shooting place.  Those who did not lie had permitted themselves
a certain amount of exaggeration and the liars had never been in fuller
flower.

A liar, in full flower, the Colonel had thought, is as beautiful as
cherry trees, or apple trees when they are in blossom.  Who should ever
discourage a liar, he thought, unless he is giving you co-ordinates?

The Colonel had collected liars all his life, as some men gather
postage stamps.  He did not classify them, except at the moment, nor
treasure them truly.  He just enjoyed, completely, hearing them lie at
the moment, unless, of course, something concerned with duty was
involved.  Last night there had been a fair amount of good lying after
the grappa had been passed around and the Colonel had enjoyed it.

There had been smoke in the room from the open charcoal fire; no, there
were logs, he thought.  Anyway a liar lies best when there is a little
smoke or when the sun has set.

He had come close to lying twice himself and had held it up and merely
exaggerated.  I hope anyway, he thought.

Now here was the frozen lagoon to ruin everything.  But it was not
ruined.

A pair of pin-tails came, suddenly, from nowhere, slanting down fast in
a dive no aeroplane ever made, and the Colonel heard their feathered
trajectory and swung and killed the drake.  He lay on the ice, hitting
it as solid as a duck can hit ice and, before he was down, the Colonel
had killed his mate, who was climbing, long-necked and fast.

She fell alongside the drake.

So it is murder, the Colonel thought.  And what isn't nowadays?  But,
boy, you can still shoot.

Boy, hell, he thought.  You beat-up old bastard.  But look at them come
now.

They were widgeon and they came in a whisp that coagulated and then
stretched to nothing.  Then they coagulated again and the treacherous
duck on the ice started to talk to them.

Let them turn once more, the Colonel said to himself.  Keep your head
down and do not move even your eyes.  They are going to come in.

They came in well, with treachery speaking to them.

Their wings were suddenly set to alight, as when you lower the flaps.
Then they saw it was ice and they rose, climbing.

The shooter, who was not a Colonel now, nor anything but a gun handler,
rose in the wooden barrel and got two.  They hit the ice almost as
solidly as the big ducks.

Two is enough from one family, the Colonel said.  Or was it one tribe?

The Colonel heard a shot behind him, where he knew there was no other
blind and turned his head to look across the frozen lagoon to the far,
sedge-lined shore.

That does it, he thought.

A bunch of mallards, that had been coming in low, were flaring up into
the sky, seeming to stand on their tails as they climbed.

He saw one fall, then heard another shot.

It was the sullen boatman shooting at the ducks that would have come to
the Colonel.

How, how can he do that? The Colonel thought.

The man had a shot-gun to shoot any cripples that might be escaping
where the dog could not get them.  For him to fire at ducks that were
coming to the Colonel's blind was, in shooting, as bad a thing as one
man could do to another.

The boatman was too far away to hear a shout.  So the Colonel fired at
him twice.

It is too far for the pellets to reach, he thought, but at least he
will know that I know what he is doing.  What the hell is this all
about?  On a beautifully run shoot like this one too?  This is the best
organized and best run duck shoot I have ever shot at and I have had as
much fun shooting here as I ever had in my life.  What is the matter
with that son of a bitch?

He knew how bad his anger was for him.  So he took two of the pills and
washed them down with a drink of Gordon's gin from his flask since
there was no water.

He knew the gin was bad for him too and he thought, everything is bad
for me except rest and very light exercise.  O.K., rest and light
exercise, boy.  Do you suppose that is light exercise?

You, beauty, he said to himself.  I wish you were here now and we were
in the double blind and if we could only just feel the backs of our
shoulders touch.  I'd look around and see you and I would shoot the
high ducks well, to show off and try to put one in the blind without
having it hit you.  I'd try to pull one down like this, he said,
hearing the wings in the air.  He rose, turned, saw the single drake,
long-necked and beautiful, the wings fast moving and travelling to the
sea.  He saw him sharp and clear and in the sky with the mountains
behind him.  He met him, covered him and pulled as he swung as far back
as he could swing the gun.

The drake came down on the ice, just outside the perimeter of the blind
and broke the ice as he fell.  It was the ice that had been broken to
put out the decoys and it had re-frozen lightly.  The calling hen
looked at him as he lay and shifted her feet.

'You never saw him before in your life,' the Colonel said to the hen.
'I don't believe you even saw him coming.  Though you may have.  But
you didn't say anything.'

The drake had hit with his head down and his head was under the ice.
But the Colonel could see the beautiful winter plumage on his breast
and wings.

I'd like to give her a vest made of the whole plumage the way the old
Mexicans used to ornament their gods, he thought.  But I suppose these
ducks have to go to the market and no one would know how to skin and
cure the skins anyway.  It could be beautiful, though, with mallard
drake skins for the back and sprig for the front with two longitudinal
stripes of teal.  One coming down over each breast.  Be a hell of a
vest.  I'm pretty sure she'd like it.

I wish they would fly, the Colonel thought.  A few fool ducks might
come in.  I have to stay ready for them if they do.  But none came in
and he had to think.

There were no shots from the other blinds and only occasional shots
from the sea.

With the good light, the birds could see the ice and they no longer
came in and instead went out to the open sea to raft up.  So he had no
shooting and he thought without intention, trying to find what had made
it at the first.  He knew he did not deserve it and he accepted it and
he lived by it, but he sought, always, to understand it.

One time it had been two sailors when he had been walking with the girl
at night.  They had whistled at her and, the Colonel thought, that was
a harmless enough thing and he should have let it go.

But there was something wrong with it.  He sensed it before he knew it.
Then he knew it solidly, because he had stopped under a light, in order
that they might see what he wore on his shoulders, so that they might
take the other side of the street.

What he wore on each shoulder was a small eagle with wings
outstretched.  It was embroidered on to the coat he wore in silver
thread.  It was not conspicuous and it had been there a long time.  But
it was visible.

The two sailors whistled again.

'Stay over there against the wall if you want to watch it,' the Colonel
had said to the girl.  'Or look away.'

'They are very big and young.'

'They won't be big for long,' the Colonel promised her.

The Colonel walked over to the whistlers.

'Where is your shore patrol?' he asked.

'How would I know?' the biggest whistler said.  'All I want is a good
look at the dame.'

'Do people like you have names and serial numbers?'

'How would I know?' said one.

The other said, 'I wouldn't tell a chicken Colonel if I had.'

Old army boy, the Colonel thought, before he hit him.  Sea lawyer.
Knows all his rights.

But he hit him with a left from nowhere and hit him three times as he
started to go.

The other one, the first whistler, had closed fast and well, for a man
who had been drinking, and the Colonel gave him the elbow in the mouth
and then, under the light, had a good right hand shot at him.  When it
was in, he glanced at the second whistler and saw that was okay.

Then he threw a left hook.  Then he put the right way into the body,
coming up.  He threw another left hook and then turned away and walked
towards the girl because he did not want to hear the head hit the
pavement.

He checked on the one that had it first and noted he slept peacefully,
chin down, with the blood coming out of his mouth.  But it was still
the right colour, the Colonel noted.

'Well, there goes my career,' he said to the girl.  'Whatever that was.
But those people certainly wear funny pants.'

'How are you?' the girl asked.

'I'm fine.  Did you watch it?'

'Yes.'

'I'll have bad hands in the morning,' he said absent mindedly.  'But I
think we can walk away from it all right.  But let's walk slowly.'

'Please walk slowly.'

'I did not mean it that way.  I mean let's not be hurried in our
departure.'

'We will walk as slowly as two people can walk.'

So they walked.

'Do you want to try an experiment?'

'Of course.'

'Let's walk so we make even the backs of our legs look dangerous.'

'I'll try.  But I don't think I can.'

'Well, let's just walk then.'

'But didn't they hit you?'

'One pretty good right behind the ear.  The second boy when he came in.'

'Is that what fighting's like?'

'When you're lucky.'

'And when you're not lucky?'

'Your knees bend too.  Either forward or backward.'

'Do you still care for me after you have fought?'

'I love you much more than before if it were possible.'

'Can't it be possible?  It would be nice.  I love you more since I saw
that thing.  Am I walking slowly enough?'

'You walk like a deer in the forest and sometimes you walk as well as a
wolf, or an old, big coyote when he is not hurried.'

'I'm not sure I wish to be an old big coyote.'

'Wait till you see one,' the Colonel said.  'You'll wish.  You walk
like all the great predators, when they walk softly.  And you are not a
predator.'

'That I can promise.'

'Walk a little ahead so I can see.'

She walked ahead and the Colonel said, 'You walk like a champion before
he is the champion.  If you were a horse I would buy you if I had to
borrow the money at twenty per cent a month.'

'You don't have to buy me.'

'I know about that.  That was not what we were discussing.  We were
discussing your gait.'

'Tell me,' she said.  'What happens to those men?  That's one of the
things I don't know about fighting.  Shouldn't I have stayed and cared
for them?'

'Never,' the Colonel told her.  'Remember that; never.  I hope they
split a good concussion between them.  They can rot.  They caused the
accident.  There is no question of civil responsibility.  We were all
insured.  If I can tell you one thing, Renata, about fighting.'

'Tell me, please.'

'If you ever fight, then you must win it.  That's all that counts.  All
the rest is cabbage, as my old friend Dr. Rommel put it.'

'Did you really like Rommel?'

'Very much.'

'But he was your enemy.'

'I love my enemies, sometimes, more than my friends.  And the Navy, you
know, wins all their fights always.  This I learned in a place called
the Pentagon building when I was still permitted to enter that building
by the front door.  If you like we can stroll back down this street, or
walk it fast and ask those two that question.'

'I tell you truly, Richard.  I have seen enough fighting for one night.'

'Me too, to tell the truth,' the Colonel said.  But he said it in
Italian and it started, '_Anche io_.  Let's go to Harry's for one, and
then I will walk you home.'

'Didn't you hurt your bad hand?'

'No,' he explained.  'I only threw it once to the head.  The other
times I punched to the body with it.'

'May I feel it?'

'If you will feel very softly.'

'But it is terribly swollen.'

'There is nothing broken in it and that sort of swelling always goes
down.'

'Do you love me?'

'Yes.  I love you with two moderately swollen hands and all my heart.'




Chapter XLI

So that was that and maybe it was that day or maybe it was another that
made the miracle.  You never knew, he thought.  There was the great
miracle and he had never consciously implemented it.  Nor, he thought,
you son of a bitch, did you ever oppose it.

It was colder than ever and the broken ice re-froze and the calling
duck did not even look up now.  She had abandoned treachery for an
attempt at security.

You bitch, the Colonel thought.  Though that is unjust.  It is your
trade.  But why is it a hen calls better than a drake.  You ought to
know, he thought.  And even that's not true.  What the hell is true?
Drakes actually call better.

Now don't think of her.  Don't think of Renata because it won't do you
any good, boy.  It might even be bad for you.  Also you said good-bye.
What a good-bye that was.  Complete with tumbrils.  And she would have
climbed up in the damned tumbril with you too.  Just so long as it was
a real tumbril.  Very rough trade, he thought.  Loving and leaving.
People can get hurt at it.

Who gave you a right to know a girl like that?

Nobody, he answered.  But Andrea introduced me to her.

But how could she love a sad son of a bitch like you?

I do not know, he thought truly.  I truly do not know.

He did not know, among other things, that the girl loved him because he
had never been sad one waking morning of his life; attack or no attack.
He had experienced anguish and sorrow.  But he had never been sad in
the morning.

They make almost none like that and the girl, although she was a young
girl, knew one when she saw one.

Now she is at home and sleeping, the Colonel thought.  That is where
she ought to be and not in any god-damn duck blind with the decoys
frozen up on us.

I wish to hell she was here though, if this were a double blind and
have her looking to the west just in case one string did come in.  It
would be nice if she were warm enough.  Maybe I can trade somebody out
of one of these real down jackets that nobody ever sold that had one.
The kind they issued to the Air Force once by mistake.

I could find out how they are quilted and make one with duck down from
here, he thought.  I'd get a good tailor to cut it and we would make it
double-breasted with no pocket on the right and lay in a chamois
shooting patch so the gun butt would never catch.

I'll do it, he said to himself.  I'll do it, or I will get one off some
joker and have it cut down for her.  I'd like to get her a good Purdey
12, not too damn light, or a pair of Boss over and unders.  She should
have guns as good as she is.  I suppose a pair of Purdey's, he thought.

Just then he heard the light swish of pinions, fast beating in the air,
and looked up.  But they were too high.  He only looked up with his
eyes.  But they were so high they could see the barrel with him in it
and the frozen-in decoys with the dejected hen, who saw them too and
quacked hard in her loyal treachery.  The ducks, they were pin-tails,
continued on their flight out towards the sea.


I never gave her anything, as she pointed out.  There was the small
moor's head.  But it does not mean anything.  She selected it and I
bought it.  That is no way to give a gift.

What I would like to give her is security, which does not exist any
more; all my love, which is worthless; all my worldly goods, which are
practically non-existent except for two good shot-guns, my soldier
suits, the medals and decorations with the citations and some books.
Also a retired Colonel's pay.

With all my worldly goods I thee endow, he thought.

And she gave me her love, some hard stones, which I returned, and the
picture.  Well, I can always give her back the picture.  I could give
her my ring from V.M.I., he thought, but where the hell did I lose that?

She wouldn't want a D.S.C. with cluster, nor two silver stars, nor the
other junk, nor the medals of her own country.  Nor those of France.
Nor those of Belgium.  Nor the trick ones.  That would be morbid.

I better just give her my love.  But how the hell do you send it?  And
how do you keep it fresh?  They can't pack it in dry ice.

Maybe they can.  I must inquire.  But how do I get that condemned jeep
engine to that old man?

Figure it out, he thought.  Figuring things out has been your trade.
Figuring things out when they were shooting at you, he added.

I wish that son of a bitch that is lousing up the duck shooting had a
rifle and I had a rifle.  We would find out pretty soon who could
figure things out.  Even in a lousy barrel in a marsh where you can't
manoeuvre.  He'd have to come to get me.

Stop that, he said to himself, and think about your girl.  You do not
want to kill anyone any more; ever.

Who are you feeding that to, he told himself.  You going to run as a
Christian?  You might give it an honest try.  She would like you better
that way.  Or would she?  I don't know, he said frankly.  I honest to
God don't know.

Maybe I will get Christian towards the end.  Yes, he said, maybe you
will.  Who wants to make a bet on that?

'You want to bet on that?' he asked the calling duck.  But she was
looking up at the sky behind him and had commenced her small chuckling
talk.

They came over too high and never circled.  They only looked down and
went on towards the open sea.

They must really be rafted up out there, the Colonel thought.  There's
probably some punt gunner trying to sneak up on them now.  They will be
pretty close into the lee with the wind and someone is sneaking on to
them now surely.  Well, when he makes his shot some may break back this
way.  But with it frozen-up I suppose I really ought to pull out
instead of staying here like a fool.

I have killed enough and I have shot as well or better than I can
shoot.  Better hell, he thought.  Nobody shoots better than you here
except Alvarito and he's a kid and shoots faster.  But you kill fewer
ducks than many bad and fair shots.

Yes, I know about that.  I know about that and why and we don't go by
the numbers any more and we threw away the book too, remember?

He remembered how, by some miracle of chance in a war, he had been with
his best friend for a moment in action in the Ardennes and they were
pursuing.

It was early fall and it was on a high upland with sandy roads and
trails and the trees were scrub oak and pines.  The enemy tank and half
track prints showed clearly in the moist sand.

It had rained the day before, but now it was clearing and visibility
was good and you could see well across all the high, rolling country
and he and his friend were glassing it as carefully as though they were
hunting game.

The Colonel, who was a General then and an assistant divisional
commander, knew the individual print of each tracked vehicle they were
pursuing.  He also knew when the enemy vehicles had run out of mines
and approximately the number of rounds that remained to them.  He also
had figured where they had to fight before they reached the Siegfried.
He was sure they would not fight at either of these two places but
would race for where they were going.

'We're pretty far up for people of our exalted rank, George,' he said
to his best friend.

'Ahead of the point, General.'

'It's okay,' the Colonel had said.  'Now we throw away the book and
chase for keeps.'

'I couldn't agree more fully, General.  Because I wrote the book
myself,' his best friend said.  'But suppose they had left something
there?'

He pointed to the logical place to defend.

'They didn't leave anything there,' the Colonel had said.  'They
haven't enough stuff left even for a fire-fight.'

'Everybody's right until he's wrong,' his best friend said, adding,
'General.'

'I'm right,' the Colonel said.  He was right, too, although in
obtaining his exact knowledge he had not fulfilled the complete spirit
of the Geneva Convention which was alleged to govern the operation of
war.

'Let's really chase,' his best friend had said.

'There's nothing holding us up and I guarantee they won't stop at
either of those two.  I didn't get that from any Kraut either.  That's
from my head.'

He looked over the country once more, and heard the wind in the trees
and smelled the heather under their boots and looked once more at the
tracks in the wet sand and that was the end of that story.

I wonder if she'd like that? he thought.  No.  It builds me up too
much.  I'd like to get somebody else to tell it to her though and build
me solid.  George can't tell it to her.  He's the only one that could
tell it to her and he can't.  He sure as hell can't.

I've been right over ninety-five per cent of the time and that's a hell
of a batting average even in something as simple as war.  But that five
per cent when you are wrong can certainly be something.

I'll never tell you about that, Daughter.  That's just a noise heard
off stage in my heart.  My lousy chicken heart.  That bastard heart
certainly couldn't hold the pace.

Maybe he will, he thought, and took two of the tablets and a swallow of
gin and looked across the grey ice.

I'm going to get that sullen character in now and pick up and get the
hell to the farm house or the lodge, I suppose that I should call it.
The shooting's over.




Chapter XLII

The colonel had signalled the boatman in by standing up, in the sunken
barrel, firing two shots towards the empty sky, and then waving him
towards the blind.

The boat came in slowly, breaking ice all the way, and the man picked
up the wooden decoys, caught the calling hen and put her in her sack,
and, with the dog slithering on the ice, picked up the ducks.  The
boatman's anger seemed to be gone and to be replaced by a solid
satisfaction.

'You shot very few,' he said to the Colonel.

'With your help.'

That was all they said and the boatman placed the ducks carefully,
breasts up, on the bow of the boat, and the Colonel handed his guns and
the combination cartridge box and shooting stool into the boat.

The Colonel got into the boat and the boatman checked the blind and
unhooked the pocketed, apron-like device which had hung on the inside
of the blind to hold shells.  Then he got into the boat too and they
commenced their slow and laborious progress out through the ice to the
open water of the brown canal.  The Colonel worked as hard with the
poling oar as he had worked coming in.  But now, in the bright
sunlight, with the snow mountains to the north, and the line of the
sedge that marked the canal ahead of them, they worked together in
complete co-ordination.

Then they were into the canal, slipping breakingly in from the last
ice; then, suddenly, light-borne and the Colonel handed the big oar to
the boatman and sat down.  He was sweating.

The dog, who had been shivering at the Colonel's feet, pawed his way
over the gunwale of the boat and swam to the canal bank.  Shaking the
water from his white bedraggled coat, he was into the brown sedge and
brush, and the Colonel watched his progress towards home by the
movement of the brush.  He had never received his sausage.

The Colonel, feeling himself sweating, although he knew he was
protected from the wind by his field jacket, took two tablets from the
bottle and a sip of gin from his flask.

The flask was flat and of silver with a leather cover.  Under the
leather cover, which was worn and stained, it was engraved, on one
side, to Richard From Renata With Love.  No one had ever seen this
inscription except the girl, the Colonel and the man who had engraved
it.  It had not been engraved in the same place it was purchased.  That
was in the earliest days, the Colonel thought.  Now who cared?

On the screw-on top of the flask was engraved From R. to R.C.

The Colonel offered the flask to the boatman who looked at him, at the
flask, and said, 'What is it?'

'English grappa.'

'I'll try it.'

He took a long drink of it; the type of drink peasants take from a
flask.

'Thank you.'

'Did you have good shooting?'

'I killed four ducks.  The dog found three cripples shot by other
people.'

'Why did you shoot?'

'I'm sorry that I shot.  I shot in anger.'

I have done that myself sometimes, the Colonel thought, and did not ask
him what the anger was about.

'I am sorry they did not fly better.'

'That's the way things go,' the Colonel said.

The Colonel was watching the movement the dog made in the high grass
and sedge.  Suddenly he saw him stop; he was quite still.  Then he
pounced.  It was a high leap and a dive forward and down.

'He has a crippled,' he said to the boatman.

'Bobby,' the boatman called.  'Bring.  Bring.'

The sedge moved and the dog came out with a mallard drake in his jaws.
The grey-white neck and the green head were swaying up and down as a
snake's might move.  It was a movement without hope.

The boatman put the boat in sharp for shore.

'I'll take him,' the Colonel said.  'Bobby!'

He took the duck from the dog's light-holding mouth and felt him intact
and sound and beautiful to hold, and with his heart beating and his
captured, hopeless eyes.

He looked at him carefully, gentling him as you might gentle a horse.

'He's only wing-tipped,' he said.  'We'll keep him for a caller or to
turn loose in the spring.  Here, take him and put him in the sack with
the hen.'

The boatman took him carefully and put him in the burlap bag that was
under the bow.  The Colonel heard the hen speak to him.  Or, maybe she
is protesting, he thought.  He could not understand duck-talk through a
burlap bag.

'Take a shot of this,' he said to the boatman.  'It's damned cold
to-day.'

The boatman took the flask and drank deeply again.

'Thank you,' he said.  'Your grappa is very, very good.'




Chapter XLIII

At the landing, before the long low stone house by the side of the
canal, there were ducks laid out on the ground In rows.

They were laid in groups that were never of the same number.  There
were a few platoons, no companies, and, the Colonel drought, I barely
have a squad.

The head game-keeper was standing on the bank in his high boots, his
short jacket and his pushed back old felt hat, and he looked critically
at the number of ducks on the bow of the boat as they came alongshore.

'It was frozen-up at our post,' the Colonel said.

'I suspected so,' the head keeper said.  'I'm sorry.  It was supposed
to be the best post.'

'Who was top gun?'

'The Barone killed forty-two.  There was a little current there that
kept it open for a while.  You probably did not hear the shooting
because it was against the wind.'

'Where is everyone?'

'They're all gone except the Barone who is waiting for you.  Your
driver is asleep in the house.'

'He would be,' the Colonel said.

'Spread those out properly,' the head-keeper told the boatman who was a
game-keeper too.  'I want to put them to the game book.'

'There is one green-head drake in the bag who is only wing-tipped.'

'Good.  I will take good care of him.'

'I will go inside and see the Barone.  I'll see you later.'

'You must get warm,' the head keeper said.  'It's been a bitter day, my
Colonel.'

The Colonel started to walk towards the door of the house.

'I'll see you later,' he said to the boatman.

'Yes, my Colonel,' the boatman said.

Alvarito, the Barone, was standing by the open fire in the middle of
the room.  He smiled his shy smile and said to his low-pitched voice,
'I am sorry you did not have better shooting.'

'We froze up completely.  I enjoyed what there was very much.'

'Are you very cold?'

'Not too cold.'

'We can have something to eat.'

'Thank you.  I'm not hungry.  Have you eaten?'

'Yes.  The others went on and I let them take my car.  Can you give me
a lift to Latisana or just above?  I can get transportation from there.'

'Of course.'

'It was a shame that it should freeze.  The prospects were so good.'

'There must have been a world of ducks outside.'

'Yes.  But now they won't stay with their feed frozen over.  They will
be on their way south to-night.'

'Will they all go?'

'All except our local ducks that breed here.  They'll stay as long as
there is any open water.'

'I'm sorry for the shoot.'

'I'm sorry you came so far for so few ducks.'

'I always love the shoot,' the Colonel said.  'And I love Venice.'

The Barone Alvarito looked away and spread his hands towards the fire.
'Yes,' he said.  'We all love Venice.  Perhaps you do the best of all.'

The Colonel made no small talk on this but said, 'I love Venice as you
know.'

'Yes.  I know,' the Barone said.  He looked at nothing.  Then he said,
'We must wake your driver.'

'Has he eaten?'

'Eaten and slept and eaten and slept.  He has also read a little in
some illustrated books he brought with him.'

'Comic books,' the Colonel said.

'I should learn to read them,' the Barone said.  He smiled the shy,
dark smile.  'Could you get me some from Trieste?'

'Any amount,' the Colonel told him.  'From superman on up into the
improbable.  Read some for me.  Look, Alvarito, what was the matter
with that game-keeper who poled my boat?  He seemed to have a hatred
for me at the start.  Pretty well through, too.'

'It was the old battle-jacket.  Allied uniform affects him that way.
You see he was a bit over-liberated.'

'Go on.'

'When the Moroccans came through here they raped both his wife and his
daughter.'

'I think I'd better have a drink,' the Colonel said.

'There is grappa there on the table.'




Chapter XLIV

They had dropped the Barone off at a villa with great gates, a
gravelled drive and a house, which, since it was over six miles from
any military objective, had the good fortune not to have been bombed.

The Colonel had said good-bye and Alvarito had told him to come down
and shoot any, or every, week-end.

'You're sure you won't come in?'

'No.  I must get back to Trieste.  Will you give my love to Renata?'

'I will.  Is that her portrait that you have wrapped up in the back of
the car?'

'It is.'

'I'll tell her that you shot very well and that the portrait was in
good condition.'

'Also my love.'

'Also your love.'

'_Ciao_, Alvarito, and thank you very much.'

'_Ciao_, my Colonel.  If one can say _ciao_ to a Colonel.'

'Consider me not a Colonel.'

'It is very difficult.  Good-bye, my Colonel.'

'In case of any unforeseen contingencies would you ask her to have the
portrait picked up at the Gritti?'

'Yes, my Colonel.'

'That's all, I guess.'

'Good-bye, my Colonel.'




Chapter XLV

They were out on the road now and the early darkness was beginning.

'Turn left,' the Colonel said.

'That's not the road for Trieste, sir,' Jackson said.

'The hell with the road to Trieste.  I ordered you to turn left.  Do
you think there is only one way in the world to get to Trieste?'

'No, sir.  I was only pointing out to the Colonel----'

'Don't you point me out a God-damn thing and until I direct you
otherwise, don't speak to me until you are spoken to.'

'Yes, sir.'

'I'm sorry, Jackson.  What I mean is I know where I'm going and I want
to think.'

'Yes, sir.'

They were on the old road that he knew so well and the Colonel thought,
well, I sent four of the ducks I promised to those I promised them to
at the Gritti.  There wasn't enough shooting to be enough feathers to
do that boy's wife any good with feathers.  But they are all big ducks
and fat and they will be good eating.  I forgot to give Bobby the
sausage.

There was no time to write Renata a note.  But what could I say, in a
note, that we did not say?

He reached into his pocket and found a pad and pencil.  He put on the
map-reading light, and with his bad hand, printed a short message in
block letters.

'Put that in your pocket, Jackson, and act on it if necessary.  If the
circumstances described occur, it is an order.'

'Yes, sir,' Jackson said, and took the folded order blank with one hand
and put it in the top left-hand pocket of his tunic.

Now take it easy, the Colonel said to himself.  Any further concern you
may have is about yourself and that is just a luxury.

You are no longer of any real use to the Army of the United States.
That has been made quite clear.

You have said good-bye to your girl and she has said good-bye to you.
That is certainly simple.

You shot well and Alvarito understands.  That is that.

So what the hell do you have to worry about, boy?  I hope you're not
the type of jerk who worries about what happens to him when there's
nothing to be done.  Let's certainly hope not.

Just then it hit him as he had known it would since they had picked up
the decoys.

Three strikes is out, he thought, and they gave me four.  I've always
been a lucky son of a bitch.

It hit him again badly.

'Jackson,' he said.  'Do you know what General Thomas J. Jackson said
on one occasion?  On the occasion of his unfortunate death.  I
memorized it once.  I can't respond for its accuracy of course.  But
this is how it was reported: "Order A. P. Hill to prepare for action."
Then some more delirious stuff.  Then he said, "No, no, let us cross
over the river and rest under the shade of the trees."'

'That's very interesting, sir,' Jackson said.  'That must have been
Stonewall Jackson, sir.'

The Colonel started to speak but he stopped while it hit him the third
time and gripped bun so he knew he could not live.

'Jackson,' the Colonel said.  'Pull up at the side of the road and cut
to your parking lights.  Do you know the way to Trieste from here?'

'Yes, sir, I have my map.'

'Good.  I'm now going to get into the large back seat of this
god-damned, over-sized luxurious automobile.'

That was the last thing the Colonel ever said.  But he made the back
seat all right and he shut the door.  He shut it carefully and well.

After a while Jackson drove the car down the ditch and willow lined
road with the car's big lights on, looking for a place to turn.  He
found one, finally, and turned carefully.  When he was on the
right-hand side of the road, facing south towards the road junction
that would put him on the highway that led to Trieste, the one he was
familiar with, he put his map light on and took out the order blank and
read:


IN THE EVENT OF MY DEATH THE WRAPPED PAINTING AND THE TWO SHOT GUNS IN
THIS CAR WILL BE RETURNED TO THE HOTEL GRITTI WHERE THEY WILL BE
CLAIMED BY THEIR RIGHTFUL OWNER SIGNED RICHARD CANTWELL, COL.,
INFANTRY, U.S.A.


'They'll return them all right, through channels,' Jackson thought, and
put the car in gear. 
 It wasn’t about anything, something about making punch, and then we
started fighting and I slipped and he had me down kneeling on my chest
and choking me with both hands like he was trying to kill me and all the
time I was trying to get the knife out of my pocket to cut him loose.
Everybody was too drunk to pull him off me. He was choking me and
hammering my head on the floor and I got the knife out and opened it up;
and I cut the muscle right across his arm and he let go of me. He
couldn’t have held on if he wanted to. Then he rolled and hung onto that
arm and started to cry and I said:

“What the hell you want to choke me for?”

I’d have killed him. I couldn’t swallow for a week. He hurt my throat
bad.

Well, I went out of there and there were plenty of them with him and
some come out after me and I made a turn and was down by the docks and I
met a fellow and he said somebody killed a man up the street. I said
“Who killed him?” and he said “I don’t know who killed him but he’s dead
all right,” and it was dark and there was water standing in the street
and no lights and windows broke and boats all up in the town and trees
blown down and everything all blown and I got a skiff and went out and
found my boat where I had her inside of Mango Key and she was all right
only she was full of water. So I bailed her out and pumped her out and
there was a moon but plenty of clouds and still plenty rough and I took
it down along; and when it was daylight I was off Eastern Harbor.

Brother, that was some storm. I was the first boat out and you never saw
water like that was. It was just as white as a lye barrel and coming
from Eastern Harbor to Sou’west Key you couldn’t recognize the shore.
There was a big channel blown right out through the middle of the beach.
Trees and all blown out and a channel cut through and all the water
white as chalk and everything on it; branches and whole trees and dead
birds, and all floating. Inside the keys were all the pelicans in the
world and all kinds of birds flying. They must have gone inside there
when they knew it was coming.

I lay at Sou’west Key a day and nobody came after me. I was the first
boat out and I seen a spar floating and I knew there must be a wreck and
I started out to look for her. I found her. She was a three-masted
schooner and I could just see the stumps of her spars out of water. She
was in too deep water and I didn’t get anything off of her. So I went on
looking for something else. I had the start on all of them and I knew I
ought to get whatever there was. I went on down over the sand-bars from
where I left that three-masted schooner and I didn’t find anything and I
went on a long way. I was way out toward the quicksands and I didn’t
find anything so I went on. Then when I was in sight of the Rebecca
Light I saw all kinds of birds making over something and I headed over
for them to see what it was and there was a cloud of birds all right.

I could see something looked like a spar up out of water and when I got
over close the birds all went up in the air and stayed all around me.
The water was clear out there and there was a spar of some kind sticking
out just above the water and when I come up close to it I saw it was all
dark under water like a long shadow and I came right over it and there
under water was a liner; just lying there all under water as big as the
whole world. I drifted over her in the boat. She lay on her side and the
stern was deep down. The port holes were all shut tight and I could see
the glass shine in the water and the whole of her; the biggest boat I
ever saw in my life laying there and I went along the whole length of
her and then I went over and anchored and I had the skiff on the deck
forward and I shoved it down into the water and sculled over with the
birds all around me.

I had a water glass like we use sponging and my hand shook so I could
hardly hold it. All the port holes were shut that you could see going
along over her but way down below near the bottom something must have
been open because there were pieces of things floating out all the time.
You couldn’t tell what they were. Just pieces. That’s what the birds
were after. You never saw so many birds. They were all around me; crazy
yelling.

I could see everything sharp and clear. I could see her rounded over and
she looked a mile long under the water. She was lying on a clear white
bank of sand and the spar was a sort of foremast or some sort of tackle
that slanted out of water the way she was laying on her side. Her bow
wasn’t very far under. I could stand on the letters of her name on her
bow and my head was just out of water. But the nearest port hole was
twelve feet down. I could just reach it with the grains pole and I tried
to break it with that but I couldn’t. The glass was too stout. So I
sculled back to the boat and got a wrench and lashed it to the end of
the grains pole and I couldn’t break it. There I was looking down
through the glass at that liner with everything in her and I was the
first one to her and I couldn’t get into her. She must have had five
million dollars worth in her.

It made me shaky to think how much she must have in her. Inside the port
hole that was closest I could see something but I couldn’t make it out
through the water glass. I couldn’t do any good with the grains pole and
I took off my clothes and stood and took a couple of deep breaths and
dove over off the stern with the wrench in my hand and swam down. I
could hold on for a second to the edge of the port hole and I could see
in and there was a woman inside with her hair floating all out. I could
see her floating plain and I hit the glass twice with the wrench hard
and I heard the noise clink in my ears but it wouldn’t break and I had
to come up.

I hung onto the dinghy and got my breath and then I climbed in and took
a couple of breaths and dove again. I swam down and took hold of the
edge of the port hole with my fingers and held it and hit the glass as
hard as I could with the wrench. I could see the woman floated in the
water through the glass. Her hair was tied once close to her head and it
floated all out in the water. I could see the rings on one of her hands.
She was right up close to the port hole and I hit the glass twice and I
didn’t even crack it. When I came up I thought I wouldn’t make it to the
top before I’d have to breathe.

I went down once more and I cracked the glass, only cracked it, and when
I came up my nose was bleeding and I stood on the bow of the liner with
my bare feet on the letters of her name and my head just out and rested
there and then I swam over to the skiff and pulled up into it and sat
there waiting for my head to stop aching and looking down into the water
glass, but I bled so I had to wash out the water glass. Then I lay back
in the skiff and held my hand under my nose to stop it and I lay there
with my head back looking up and there was a million birds above and all
around.

When I quit bleeding I took another look through the glass and then I
sculled over to the boat to try and find something heavier than the
wrench but I couldn’t find a thing; not even a sponge hook. I went back
and the water was clearer all the time and you could see everything that
floated out over that white bank of sand. I looked for sharks but there
weren’t any. You could have seen a shark a long way away. The water was
so clear and the sand white. There was a grapple for an anchor on the
skiff and I cut it off and went overboard and down with it. It carried
me right down and past the port hole and I grabbed and couldn’t hold
anything and went on down and down, sliding along the curved side of
her. I had to let go of the grapple. I heard it bump once and it seemed
like a year before I came up through to the top of the water. The skiff
was floated away with the tide and I swam over to her with my nose
bleeding in the water while I swam and I was plenty glad there weren’t
sharks; but I was tired.

My head felt cracked open and I lay in the skiff and rested and then I
sculled back. It was getting along in the afternoon. I went down once
more with the wrench and it didn’t do any good. That wrench was too
light. It wasn’t any good diving unless you had a big hammer or
something heavy enough to do good. Then I lashed the wrench to the
grains pole again and I watched through the water glass and pounded on
the glass and hammered until the wrench came off and I saw it in the
glass, clear and sharp, go sliding down along her and then off and down
to the quicksand and go in. Then I couldn’t do a thing. The wrench was
gone and I’d lost the grapple so I sculled back to the boat. I was too
tired to get the skiff aboard and the sun was pretty low. The birds were
all pulling out and leaving her and I headed for Sou’west Key towing the
skiff and the birds going on ahead of me and behind me. I was plenty
tired.

That night it came on to blow and it blew for a week. You couldn’t get
out to her. They come out from town and told me the fellow I’d had to
cut was all right except for his arm and I went back to town and they
put me under five hundred dollar bond. It came out all right because
some of them, friends of mine, swore he was after me with an ax, but by
the time we got back out to her the Greeks had blown her open and
cleaned her out. They got the safe out with dynamite. Nobody ever knows
how much they got. She carried gold and they got it all. They stripped
her clean. I found her and I never got a nickel out of her.

It was a hell of a thing all right. They say she was just outside of
Havana harbor when the hurricane hit and she couldn’t get in or the
owners wouldn’t let the captain chance coming in; they say he wanted to
try; so she had to go with it and in the dark they were running with it
trying to go through the gulf between Rebecca and Tortugas when she
struck on the quicksands. Maybe her rudder was carried away. Maybe they
weren’t even steering. But anyway they couldn’t have known they were
quicksands and when she struck the captain must have ordered them to
open up the ballast tanks so she’d lay solid. But it was quicksand she’d
hit and when they opened the tanks she went in stern first and then over
on her beam ends. There were four hundred and fifty passengers and the
crew on board of her and they must all have been aboard of her when I
found her. They must have opened the tanks as soon as she struck and the
minute she settled on it the quicksands took her down. Then her boilers
must have burst and that must have been what made those pieces that came
out. It was funny there weren’t any sharks though. There wasn’t a fish.
I could have seen them on that clear white sand.

Plenty of fish now though; jewfish, the biggest kind. The biggest part
of her’s under the sand now but they live inside of her; the biggest
kind of jewfish. Some weigh three to four hundred pounds. Sometime we’ll
go out and get some. You can see the Rebecca light from where she is.
They’ve got a buoy on her now. She’s right at the end of the quicksand
right at the edge of the gulf. She only missed going through by about a
hundred yards. In the dark in the storm they just missed it; raining the
way it was they couldn’t have seen the Rebecca. Then they’re not used to
that sort of thing. The captain of a liner isn’t used to scudding that
way. They have a course and they tell me they set some sort of a compass
and it steers itself. They probably didn’t know where they were when
they ran with that blow but they come close to making it. Maybe they’d
lost the rudder though. Anyway there wasn’t another thing for them to
hit till they’d get to Mexico once they were in that gulf. Must have
been something though when they struck in that rain and wind and he told
them to open her tanks. Nobody could have been on deck in that blow and
rain. Everybody must have been below. They couldn’t have lived on deck.
There must have been some scenes inside all right because you know she
settled fast. I saw that wrench go into the sand. The captain couldn’t
have known it was quicksand when she struck unless he knew these waters.
He just knew it wasn’t rock. He must have seen it all up in the bridge.
He must have known what it was about when she settled. I wonder how fast
she made it. I wonder if the mate was there with him. Do you think they
stayed inside the bridge or do you think they took it outside? They
never found any bodies. Not a one. Nobody floating. They float a long
way with life belts too. They must have took it inside. Well, the Greeks
got it all. Everything. They must have come fast all right. They picked
her clean. First there was the birds, then me, then the Greeks, and even
the birds got more out of her than I did.




                      A CLEAN, WELL−LIGHTED PLACE


It was late and every one had left the café except an old man who sat in
the shadow the leaves of the tree made against the electric light. In
the daytime the street was dusty, but at night the dew settled the dust
and the old man liked to sit late because he was deaf and now at night
it was quiet and he felt the difference. The two waiters inside the café
knew that the old man was a little drunk, and while he was a good client
they knew that if he became too drunk he would leave without paying, so
they kept watch on him.

“Last week he tried to commit suicide,” one waiter said.

“Why?”

“He was in despair.”

“What about?”

“Nothing.”

“How do you know it was nothing?”

“He has plenty of money.”

They sat together at a table that was close against the wall near the
door of the café and looked at the terrace where the tables were all
empty except where the old man sat in the shadow of the leaves of the
tree that moved slightly in the wind. A girl and a soldier went by in
the street. The street light shone on the brass number on his collar.
The girl wore no head covering and hurried beside him.

“The guard will pick him up,” one waiter said.

“What does it matter if he gets what he’s after?”

“He had better get off the street now. The guard will get him. They went
by five minutes ago.”

The old man sitting in the shadow rapped on his saucer with his glass.
The younger waiter went over to him.

“What do you want?”

The old man looked at him. “Another brandy,” he said.

“You’ll be drunk,” the waiter said. The old man looked at him. The
waiter went away.

“He’ll stay all night,” he said to his colleague. “I’m sleepy now. I
never get into bed before three o’clock. He should have killed himself
last week.”

The waiter took the brandy bottle and another saucer from the counter
inside the café and marched out to the old man’s table. He put down the
saucer and poured the glass full of brandy.

“You should have killed yourself last week,” he said to the deaf man.
The old man motioned with his finger. “A little more,” he said. The
waiter poured on into the glass so that the brandy slopped over and ran
down the stem into the top saucer of the pile. “Thank you,” the old man
said. The waiter took the bottle back inside the café. He sat down at
the table with his colleague again.

“He’s drunk now,” he said.

“He’s drunk every night.”

“What did he want to kill himself for?”

“How should I know.”

“How did he do it?”

“He hung himself with a rope.”

“Who cut him down?”

“His niece.”

“Why did they do it?”

“Fear for his soul.”

“How much money has he got?”

“He’s got plenty.”

“He must be eighty years old.”

“Anyway I should say he was eighty.”

“I wish he would go home. I never get to bed before three o’clock. What
kind of hour is that to go to bed?”

“He stays up because he likes it.”

“He’s lonely. I’m not lonely. I have a wife waiting in bed for me.”

“He had a wife once too.”

“A wife would be no good to him now.”

“You can’t tell. He might be better with a wife.”

“His niece looks after him.”

“I know. You said she cut him down.”

“I wouldn’t want to be that old. An old man is a nasty thing.”

“Not always. This old man is clean. He drinks without spilling. Even
now, drunk. Look at him.”

“I don’t want to look at him. I wish he would go home. He has no regard
for those who must work.”

The old man looked from his glass across the square, then over at the
waiters.

“Another brandy,” he said, pointing to his glass. The waiter who was in
a hurry came over.

“Finished,” he said, speaking with that omission of syntax stupid people
employ when talking to drunken people or foreigners. “No more tonight.
Close now.”

“Another,” said the old man.

“No. Finished.” The waiter wiped the edge of the table with a towel and
shook his head.

The old man stood up, slowly counted the saucers, took a leather coin
purse from his pocket and paid for the drinks, leaving half a peseta
tip.

The waiter watched him go down the street, a very old man walking
unsteadily but with dignity.

“Why didn’t you let him stay and drink?” the unhurried waiter asked.
They were putting up the shutters. “It is not half-past two.”

“I want to go home to bed.”

“What is an hour?”

“More to me than to him.”

“An hour is the same.”

“You talk like an old man yourself. He can buy a bottle and drink at
home.”

“It’s not the same.”

“No, it is not,” agreed the waiter with a wife. He did not wish to be
unjust. He was only in a hurry.

“And you? You have no fear of going home before your usual hour?”

“Are you trying to insult me?”

“No, hombre, only to make a joke.”

“No,” the waiter who was in a hurry said, rising from pulling down the
metal shutters. “I have confidence. I am all confidence.”

“You have youth, confidence, and a job,” the older waiter said. “You
have everything.”

“And what do you lack?”

“Everything but work.”

“You have everything I have.”

“No. I have never had confidence and I am not young.”

“Come on. Stop talking nonsense and lock up.”

“I am of those who like to stay late at the café,” the older waiter
said. “With all those who do not want to go to bed. With all those who
need a light for the night.”

“I want to go home and into bed.”

“We are of two different kinds,” the older waiter said. He was now
dressed to go home. “It is not only a question of youth and confidence
although those things are very beautiful. Each night I am reluctant to
close up because there may be some one who needs the café.”

“Hombre, there are bodegas open all night long.”

“You do not understand. This is a clean and pleasant café. It is well
lighted. The light is very good and also, now, there are shadows of the
leaves.”

“Good night,” said the younger waiter.

“Good night,” the other said. Turning off the electric light he
continued the conversation with himself. It is the light of course but
it is necessary that the place be clean and pleasant. You do not want
music. Certainly you do not want music. Nor can you stand before a bar
with dignity although that is all that is provided for these hours. What
did he fear? It was not fear or dread. It was a nothing that he knew too
well. It was all a nothing and a man was nothing too. It was only that
and light was all it needed and a certain cleanness and order. Some
lived in it and never felt it but he knew it all was nada y pues nada y
nada y pues nada. Our nada who art in nada, nada be thy name thy kingdom
nada thy will be nada in nada as it is in nada. Give us this nada our
daily nada and nada us our nada as we nada our nadas and nada us not
into nada but deliver us from nada; pues nada. Hail nothing full of
nothing, nothing is with thee. He smiled and stood before a bar with a
shining steam pressure coffee machine.

“What’s yours?” asked the barman.

“Nada.”

“Otro loco mas,” said the barman and turned away.

“A little cup,” said the waiter.

The barman poured it for him.

“The light is very bright and pleasant but the bar is unpolished,” the
waiter said.

The barman looked at him but did not answer. It was too late at night
for conversation.

“You want another copita?” the barman asked.

“No, thank you,” said the waiter and went out. He disliked bars and
bodegas. A clean, well-lighted café was a very different thing. Now,
without thinking further, he would go home to his room. He would lie in
the bed and finally, with daylight, he would go to sleep. After all, he
said to himself, it is probably only insomnia. Many must have it.




                         THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD


When he saw us come in the door the bartender looked up and then reached
over and put the glass covers on the two free-lunch bowls.

“Give me a beer,” I said. He drew it, cut the top off with the spatula
and then held the glass in his hand. I put the nickel on the wood and he
slid the beer toward me.

“What’s yours?” he said to Tom.

“Beer.”

He drew that beer and cut it off and when he saw the money he pushed the
beer across to Tom.

“What’s the matter?” Tom asked.

The bartender didn’t answer him. He just looked over our heads and said,
“What’s yours?” to a man who’d come in.

“Rye,” the man said. The bartender put out the bottle and glass and a
glass of water.

Tom reached over and took the glass off the free-lunch bowl. It was a
bowl of pickled pig’s feet and there was a wooden thing that worked like
a scissors, with two wooden forks at the end to pick them up with.

“No,” said the bartender and put the glass cover back on the bowl. Tom
held the wooden scissors fork in his hand. “Put it back,” said the
bartender.

“You know where,” said Tom.

The bartender reached a hand forward under the bar, watching us both. I
put fifty cents on the wood and he straightened up.

“What was yours?” he said.

“Beer,” I said, and before he drew the beer he uncovered both the bowls.

“Your goddam pig’s feet stink,” Tom said, and spit what he had in his
mouth on the floor. The bartender didn’t say anything. The man who had
drunk the rye paid and went out without looking back.

“You stink yourself,” the bartender said. “All you punks stink.”

“He says we’re punks,” Tommy said to me.

“Listen,” I said. “Let’s get out.”

“You punks clear the hell out of here,” the bartender said.

“I said we were going out,” I said. “It wasn’t your idea.”

“We’ll be back,” Tommy said.

“No you won’t,” the bartender told him.

“Tell him how wrong he is,” Tom turned to me.

“Come on,” I said.

Outside it was good and dark.

“What the hell kind of place is this?” Tommy said.

“I don’t know,” I said. “Let’s go down to the station.”

We’d come in that town at one end and we were going out the other. It
smelled of hides and tan bark and the big piles of sawdust. It was
getting dark as we came in, and now that it was dark it was cold and the
puddles of water in the road were freezing at the edges.

Down at the station there were five whores waiting for the train to come
in, and six white men and four Indians. It was crowded and hot from the
stove and full of stale smoke. As we came in nobody was talking and the
ticket window was down.

“Shut the door, can’t you?” somebody said.

I looked to see who said it. It was one of the white men. He wore
stagged trousers and lumbermen’s rubbers and a mackinaw shirt like the
others, but he had no cap and his face was white and his hands were
white and thin.

“Aren’t you going to shut it?”

“Sure,” I said, and shut it.

“Thank you,” he said. One of the other men snickered.

“Ever interfere with a cook?” he said to me.

“No.”

“You interfere with this one,” he looked at the cook. “He likes it.”

The cook looked away from him holding his lips tight together.

“He puts lemon juice on his hands,” the man said. “He wouldn’t get them
in dishwater for anything. Look how white they are.”

One of the whores laughed out loud. She was the biggest whore I ever saw
in my life and the biggest woman. And she had on one of those silk
dresses that change colors. There were two other whores that were nearly
as big but the big one must have weighed three hundred and fifty pounds.
You couldn’t believe she was real when you looked at her. All three had
those changeable silk dresses. They sat side by side on the bench. They
were huge. The other two were just ordinary looking whores, peroxide
blondes.

“Look at his hands,” the man said and nodded his head at the cook. The
whore laughed again and shook all over.

The cook turned and said to her quickly, “You big disgusting mountain of
flesh.”

She just kept on laughing and shaking.

“Oh, my Christ,” she said. She had a nice voice. “Oh, my sweet Christ.”

The two other whores, the big ones, acted very quiet and placid as
though they didn’t have much sense, but they were big, nearly as big as
the biggest one. They’d have both gone well over two hundred and fifty
pounds. The other two were dignified.

Of the men, besides the cook and the one who talked, there were two
other lumberjacks, one that listened, interested but bashful, and the
other that seemed getting ready to say something, and two Swedes. Two
Indians were sitting down at the end of the bench and one standing up
against the wall.

The man who was getting ready to say something spoke to me very low,
“Must be like getting on top of a hay mow.”

I laughed and said it to Tommy.

“I swear to Christ I’ve never been anywhere like this,” he said. “Look
at the three of them.” Then the cook spoke up.

“How old are you boys?”

“I’m ninety-six and he’s sixty-nine,” Tommy said.

“Ho! Ho! Ho!” the big whore shook with laughing. She had a really pretty
voice. The other whores didn’t smile.

“Oh, can’t you be decent?” the cook said. “I asked just to be friendly.”

“We’re seventeen and nineteen,” I said.

“What’s the matter with you?” Tommy turned to me.

“That’s all right.”

“You can call me Alice,” the big whore said and then she began to shake
again.

“Is that your name?” Tommy asked.

“Sure,” she said. “Alice. Isn’t it?” she turned to the man who sat by
the cook.

“Alice. That’s right.”

“That’s the sort of name you’d have,” the cook said.

“It’s my real name,” Alice said.

“What’s the other girls’ names?” Tom asked.

“Hazel and Ethel,” Alice said. Hazel and Ethel smiled. They weren’t very
bright.

“What’s your name?” I said to one of the blondes.

“Frances,” she said.

“Frances what?”

“Frances Wilson. What’s it to you?”

“What’s yours?” I asked the other one.

“Oh, don’t be fresh,” she said.

“He just wants us all to be friends,” the man who talked said. “Don’t
you want to be friends?”

“No,” the peroxide one said. “Not with you.”

“She’s just a spitfire,” the man said. “A regular little spitfire.”

The one blonde looked at the other and shook her head.

“Goddamned mossbacks,” she said.

Alice commenced to laugh again and to shake all over.

“There’s nothing funny,” the cook said. “You all laugh but there’s
nothing funny. You two young lads; where are you bound for?”

“Where are you going yourself?” Tom asked him.

“I want to go to Cadillac,” the cook said. “Have you ever been there? My
sister lives there.”

“He’s a sister himself,” the man in the stagged trousers said.

“Can’t you stop that sort of thing?” the cook asked. “Can’t we speak
decently?”

“Cadillac is where Steve Ketchel came from and where Ad Wolgast is
from,” the shy man said.

“Steve Ketchel,” one of the blondes said in a high voice as though the
name had pulled a trigger in her. “His own father shot and killed him.
Yes, by Christ, his own father. There aren’t any more men like Steve
Ketchel.”

“Wasn’t his name Stanley Ketchel?” asked the cook.

“Oh, shut up,” said the blonde. “What do you know about Steve? Stanley.
He was no Stanley. Steve Ketchel was the finest and most beautiful man
that ever lived. I never saw a man as clean and as white and as
beautiful as Steve Ketchel. There never was a man like that. He moved
just like a tiger and he was the finest, free-est, spender that ever
lived.”

“Did you know him?” one of the men asked.

“Did I know him? Did I know him? Did I love him? You ask me that? I knew
him like you know nobody in the world and I loved him like you love God.
He was the greatest, finest, whitest, most beautiful man that ever
lived, Steve Ketchel, and his own father shot him down like a dog.”

“Were you out on the coast with him?”

“No. I knew him before that. He was the only man I ever loved.”

Every one was very respectful to the peroxide blonde, who said all this
in a high stagey way, but Alice was beginning to shake again. I felt it
sitting by her.

“You should have married him,” the cook said.

“I wouldn’t hurt his career,” the peroxide blonde said. “I wouldn’t be a
drawback to him. A wife wasn’t what he needed. Oh, my God, what a man he
was.”

“That was a fine way to look at it,” the cook said. “Didn’t Jack Johnson
knock him out though?”

“It was a trick,” Peroxide said. “That big dinge took him by surprise.
He’d just knocked Jack Johnson down, the big black bastard. That nigger
beat him by a fluke.”

The ticket window went up and the three Indians went over to it.

“Steve knocked him down,” Peroxide said. “He turned to smile at me.”

“I thought you said you weren’t on the coast,” some one said.

“I went out just for that fight. Steve turned to smile at me and that
black son of a bitch from hell jumped up and hit him by surprise. Steve
could lick a hundred like that black bastard.”

“He was a great fighter,” the lumberjack said.

“I hope to God he was,” Peroxide said. “I hope to God they don’t have
fighters like that now. He was like a god, he was. So white and clean
and beautiful and smooth and fast and like a tiger or like lightning.”

“I saw him in the moving pictures of the fight,” Tom said. We were all
very moved. Alice was shaking all over and I looked and saw she was
crying. The Indians had gone outside on the platform.

“He was more than any husband could ever be,” Peroxide said. “We were
married in the eyes of God and I belong to him right now and always will
and all of me is his. I don’t care about my body. They can take my body.
My soul belongs to Steve Ketchel. By God, he was a man.”

Everybody felt terribly. It was sad and embarrassing. Then Alice, who
was still shaking, spoke. “You’re a dirty liar,” she said in that low
voice. “You never layed Steve Ketchel in your life and you know it.”

“How can you say that?” Peroxide said proudly.

“I say it because it’s true,” Alice said. “I’m the only one here that
ever knew Steve Ketchel and I come from Mancelona and I knew him there
and it’s true and you know it’s true and God can strike me dead if it
isn’t true.”

“He can strike me too,” Peroxide said.

“This is true, true, true, and you know it. Not just made up and I know
exactly what he said to me.”

“What did he say?” Peroxide asked, complacently.

Alice was crying so she could hardly speak from shaking so.

“He said ‘You’re a lovely piece, Alice.’ That’s exactly what he said.”

“It’s a lie,” Peroxide said.

“It’s true,” Alice said. “That’s truly what he said.”

“It’s a lie,” Peroxide said proudly.

“No, it’s true, true, true, to Jesus and Mary true.”

“Steve couldn’t have said that. It wasn’t the way he talked,” Peroxide
said happily.

“It’s true,” Alice said in her nice voice. “And it doesn’t make any
difference to me whether you believe it or not.” She wasn’t crying any
more and she was calm.

“It would be impossible for Steve to have said that,” Peroxide declared.

“He said it,” Alice said and smiled. “And I remember when he said it and
I was a lovely piece then exactly as he said, and right now I’m a better
piece than you, you dried up old hot-water bottle.”

“You can’t insult me,” said Peroxide. “You big mountain of pus. I have
my memories.”

“No,” Alice said in that sweet lovely voice, “you haven’t got any real
memories except having your tubes out and when you started C. and M.
Everything else you just read in the papers. I’m clean and you know it
and men like me, even though I’m big, and you know it, and I never lie
and you know it.”

“Leave me with my memories,” Peroxide said. “With my true, wonderful
memories.”

Alice looked at her and then at us and her face lost that hurt look and
she smiled and she had about the prettiest face I ever saw. She had a
pretty face and a nice smooth skin and a lovely voice and she was nice
all right and really friendly. But my God she was big. She was as big as
three women. Tom saw me looking at her and he said, “Come on. Let’s go.”

“Good-bye,” said Alice. She certainly had a nice voice.

“Good-bye,” I said.

“Which way are you boys going?” asked the cook.

“The other way from you,” Tom told him.




                     GOD REST YOU MERRY, GENTLEMEN


In those days the distances were all very different, the dirt blew off
the hills that now have been cut down, and Kansas City was very like
Constantinople. You may not believe this. No one believes this; but it
is true. On this afternoon it was snowing and inside an automobile
dealer’s show window, lighted against the early dark, there was a racing
motor car finished entirely in silver with Dans Argent lettered on the
hood. This I believed to mean the silver dance or the silver dancer,
and, slightly puzzled which it meant but happy in the sight of the car
and pleased by my knowledge of a foreign language, I went along the
street in the snow. I was walking from the Woolf Brothers’ saloon where,
on Christmas and Thanksgiving Day, a free turkey dinner was served,
toward the city hospital which was on a high hill that overlooked the
smoke, the buildings and the streets of the town. In the reception room
of the hospital were the two ambulance surgeons Doc Fischer and Doctor
Wilcox, sitting, the one before a desk, the other in a chair against the
wall.

Doc Fischer was thin, sand-blond, with a thin mouth, amused eyes and
gambler’s hands. Doctor Wilcox was short, dark and carried an indexed
book, _The Young Doctor’s Friend and Guide_, which, being consulted on
any given subject, told symptoms and treatment. It was also
cross-indexed so that being consulted on symptoms it gave diagnoses. Doc
Fischer had suggested that any future editions should be further
cross-indexed so that if consulted as to the treatments being given, it
would reveal ailments and symptoms. “As an aid to memory,” he said.

Doctor Wilcox was sensitive about this book but could not get along
without it. It was bound in limp leather and fitted his coat pocket and
he had bought it at the advice of one of his professors who had said,
“Wilcox, you have no business being a physician and I have done
everything in my power to prevent you from being certified as one. Since
you are now a member of this learned profession I advise you, in the
name of humanity, to obtain a copy of _The Young Doctor’s Friend and
Guide_ and use it, Doctor Wilcox. Learn to use it.”

Doctor Wilcox had said nothing but he had bought the leather-bound guide
that same day.

“Well, Horace,” Doc Fischer said as I came in the receiving room which
smelt of cigarettes, iodoform, carbolic and an over-heated radiator.

“Gentlemen,” I said.

“What news along the rialto?” Doc Fischer asked. He affected a certain
extravagance of speech which seemed to me to be of the utmost elegance.

“The free turkey at Woolf’s,” I answered.

“You partook?”

“Copiously.”

“Many of the confrères present?”

“All of them. The whole staff.”

“Much Yuletide cheer?”

“Not much.”

“Doctor Wilcox here has partaken slightly,” Doc Fischer said. Doctor
Wilcox looked up at him, then at me.

“Want a drink?” he asked.

“No, thanks,” I said.

“That’s all right,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“Horace,” Doc Fischer said, “you don’t mind me calling you Horace, do
you?”

“No.”

“Good old Horace. We’ve had an extremely interesting case.”

“I’ll say,” said Doctor Wilcox.

“You know the lad who was in here yesterday?”

“Which one?”

“The lad who sought eunuch-hood.”

“Yes.” I had been there when he came in. He was a boy about sixteen. He
came in with no hat on and was very excited and frightened but
determined. He was curly haired and well built and his lips were
prominent.

“What’s the matter with you, son?” Doctor Wilcox asked him.

“I want to be castrated,” the boy said.

“Why?” Doc Fischer asked.

“I’ve prayed and I’ve done everything and nothing helps.”

“Helps what?”

“That awful lust.”

“What awful lust?”

“The way I get. The way I can’t stop getting. I pray all night about
it.”

“Just what happens?” Doc Fischer asked.

The boy told him. “Listen, boy,” Doc Fischer said. “There’s nothing
wrong with you. That’s the way you’re supposed to be. There’s nothing
wrong with that.”

“It is wrong,” said the boy. “It’s a sin against purity. It’s a sin
against our Lord and Saviour.”

“No,” said Doc Fischer. “It’s a natural thing. It’s the way you are
supposed to be and later on you will think you are very fortunate.”

“Oh, you don’t understand,” the boy said.

“Listen,” Doc Fischer said and he told the boy certain things.

“No. I won’t listen. You can’t make me listen.”

“Please listen,” Doc Fischer said.

“You’re just a goddamned fool,” Doctor Wilcox said to the boy.

“Then you won’t do it?” the boy asked.

“Do what?”

“Castrate me.”

“Listen,” Doc Fischer said. “No one will castrate you. There is nothing
wrong with your body. You have a fine body and you must not think about
that. If you are religious remember that what you complain of is no
sinful state but the means of consummating a sacrament.”

“I can’t stop it happening,” the boy said. “I pray all night and I pray
in the daytime. It is a sin, a constant sin against purity.”

“Oh, go and ——” Doctor Wilcox said.

“When you talk like that I don’t hear you,” the boy said with dignity to
Doctor Wilcox. “Won’t you please do it?” he asked Doc Fischer.

“No,” said Doc Fischer. “I’ve told you, boy.”

“Get him out of here,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“I’ll get out,” the boy said. “Don’t touch me. I’ll get out.”

That was about five o’clock on the day before.

“So what happened?” I asked.

“So at one o’clock this morning,” Doc Fischer said, “we received the
youth self-mutilated with a razor.”

“Castrated?”

“No,” said Doc Fischer. “He didn’t know what castrate meant.”

“He may die,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“Why?”

“Loss of blood.”

“The good physician here, Doctor Wilcox, my colleague, was on call and
he was unable to find this emergency listed in his book.”

“The hell with you talking that way,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“I only mean it in the friendliest way, Doctor,” Doc Fischer said,
looking at his hands, at his hands that had, with his willingness to
oblige and his lack of respect for Federal statutes, made him his
trouble. “Horace here will bear me out that I only speak of it in the
very friendliest way. It was an amputation the young man performed,
Horace.”

“Well, I wish you wouldn’t ride me about it,” Doctor Wilcox said. “There
isn’t any need to ride me.”

“Ride you, Doctor, on the day, the very anniversary, of our Saviour’s
birth?”

“_Our_ Saviour? Ain’t you a Jew?” Doctor Wilcox said.

“So I am. So I am. It always is slipping my mind. I’ve never given it
its proper importance. So good of you to remind me. _Your_ Saviour.
That’s right. _Your_ Saviour, undoubtedly _your_ Saviour—and the ride
for Palm Sunday.”

“You’re too damned smart,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“An excellent diagnosis, Doctor. I was always too damned smart. Too
damned smart on the coast certainly. Avoid it, Horace. You haven’t much
tendency but sometimes I see a gleam. But what a diagnosis—and without
the book.”

“The hell with you,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“All in good time, Doctor,” Doc Fischer said. “All in good time. If
there is such a place I shall certainly visit it. I have even had a very
small look into it. No more than a peek, really. I looked away almost at
once. And do you know what the young man said, Horace, when the good
Doctor here brought him in? He said, ‘Oh, I asked you to do it. I asked
you so many times to do it’.”

“On Christmas Day, too,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“The significance of the particular day is not important,” Doc Fischer
said.

“Maybe not to you,” said Doctor Wilcox.

“You hear him, Horace?” Doc Fischer said. “You hear him? Having
discovered my vulnerable point, my achilles tendon so to speak, the
doctor pursues his advantage.”

“You’re too damned smart,” Doctor Wilcox said.




                             THE SEA CHANGE


“All right,” said the man. “What about it?”

“No,” said the girl, “I can’t.”

“You mean you won’t.”

“I can’t,” said the girl. “That’s all that I mean.”

“You mean that you won’t.”

“All right,” said the girl. “You have it your own way.”

“I don’t have it my own way. I wish to God I did.”

“You did for a long time,” the girl said.

It was early, and there was no one in the café except the barman and
these two who sat together at a table in the corner. It was the end of
the summer and they were both tanned, so that they looked out of place
in Paris. The girl wore a tweed suit, her skin was a smooth golden
brown, her blonde hair was cut short and grew beautifully away from her
forehead. The man looked at her.

“I’ll kill her,” he said.

“Please don’t,” the girl said. She had very fine hands and the man
looked at them. They were slim and brown and very beautiful.

“I will. I swear to God I will.”

“It won’t make you happy.”

“Couldn’t you have gotten into something else? Couldn’t you have gotten
into some other jam?”

“It seems not,” the girl said. “What are you going to do about it?”

“I told you.”

“No; I mean really.”

“I don’t know,” he said. She looked at him and put out her hand. “Poor
old Phil,” she said. He looked at her hands, but he did not touch her
hand with his.

“No, thanks,” he said.

“It doesn’t do any good to say I’m sorry?”

“No.”

“Nor to tell you how it is?”

“I’d rather not hear.”

“I love you very much.”

“Yes, this proves it.”

“I’m sorry,” she said, “if you don’t understand.”

“I understand. That’s the trouble. I understand.”

“You do,” she said. “That makes it worse, of course.”

“Sure,” he said, looking at her. “I’ll understand all the time. All day
and all night. Especially all night. I’ll understand. You don’t have to
worry about that.”

“I’m sorry,” she said.

“If it was a man——”

“Don’t say that. It wouldn’t be a man. You know that. Don’t you trust
me?”

“That’s funny,” he said. “Trust you. That’s really funny.”

“I’m sorry,” she said. “That’s all I seem to say. But when we do
understand each other there’s no use to pretend we don’t.”

“No,” he said. “I suppose not.”

“I’ll come back if you want me.”

“No. I don’t want you.”

Then they did not say anything for a while.

“You don’t believe I love you, do you?” the girl asked.

“Let’s not talk rot,” the man said.

“Don’t you really believe I love you?”

“Why don’t you prove it?”

“You didn’t use to be that way. You never asked me to prove anything.
That isn’t polite.”

“You’re a funny girl.”

“You’re not. You’re a fine man and it breaks my heart to go off and
leave you——”

“You have to, of course.”

“Yes,” she said. “I have to and you know it.”

He did not say anything and she looked at him and put her hand out
again. The barman was at the far end of the bar. His face was white and
so was his jacket. He knew these two and thought them a handsome young
couple. He had seen many handsome young couples break up and new couples
form that were never so handsome long. He was not thinking about this,
but about a horse. In half an hour he could send across the street to
find if the horse had won.

“Couldn’t you just be good to me and let me go?” the girl asked.

“What do you think I’m going to do?”

Two people came in the door and went up to the bar.

“Yes, sir,” the barman took the orders.

“You can’t forgive me? When you know about it?” the girl asked.

“No.”

“You don’t think things we’ve had and done should make any difference in
understanding?”

“‘Vice is a monster of such fearful mien,’” the young man said bitterly,
“that to be something or other needs but to be seen. Then we something,
something, then embrace.” He could not remember the words. “I can’t
quote,” he said.

“Let’s not say vice,” she said. “That’s not very polite.”

“Perversion,” he said.

“James,” one of the clients addressed the barman, “you’re looking very
well.”

“You’re looking very well yourself,” the barman said.

“Old James,” the other client said. “You’re fatter, James.”

“It’s terrible,” the barman said, “the way I put it on.”

“Don’t neglect to insert the brandy, James,” the first client said.

“No, sir,” said the barman. “Trust me.”

The two at the bar looked over at the two at the table, then looked back
at the barman again. Towards the barman was the comfortable direction.

“I’d like it better if you didn’t use words like that,” the girl said.
“There’s no necessity to use a word like that.”

“What do you want me to call it?”

“You don’t have to call it. You don’t have to put any name to it.”

“That’s the name for it.”

“No,” she said. “We’re made up of all sorts of things. You’ve known
that. You’ve used it well enough.”

“You don’t have to say that again.”

“Because that explains it to you.”

“All right,” he said. “All right.”

“You mean all wrong. I know. It’s all wrong. But I’ll come back. I told
you I’d come back. I’ll come back right away.”

“No, you won’t.”

“I’ll come back.”

“No, you won’t. Not to me.”

“You’ll see.”

“Yes,” he said. “That’s the hell of it. You probably will.”

“Of course I will.”

“Go on, then.”

“Really?” She could not believe him, but her voice was happy.

“Go on,” his voice sounded strange to him. He was looking at her, at the
way her mouth went and the curve of her cheek bones, at her eyes and at
the way her hair grew on her forehead and at the edge of her ear and at
her neck.

“Not really. Oh, you’re too sweet,” she said. “You’re too good to me.”

“And when you come back tell me all about it.” His voice sounded very
strange. He did not recognize it. She looked at him quickly. He was
settled into something.

“You want me to go?” she asked seriously.

“Yes,” he said seriously. “Right away.” His voice was not the same, and
his mouth was very dry. “Now,” he said.

She stood up and went out quickly. She did not look back at him. He
watched her go. He was not the same looking man as he had been before he
had told her to go. He got up from the table, picked up the two checks
and went over to the bar with them.

“I’m a different man, James,” he said to the barman. “You see in me
quite a different man.”

“Yes, sir?” said James.

“Vice,” said the brown young man, “is a very strange thing, James.” He
looked out the door. He saw her going down the street. As he looked in
the glass, he saw he was really quite a different looking man. The other
two at the bar moved down to make room for him.

“You’re right there, sir,” James said.

The other two moved down a little more, so that he would be quite
comfortable. The young man saw himself in the mirror behind the bar. “I
said I was a different man, James,” he said. Looking into the mirror he
saw that this was quite true.

“You look very well, sir,” James said. “You must have had a very good
summer.”




                         A WAY YOU’LL NEVER BE


The attack had gone across the field, been held up by machine-gun fire
from the sunken road and from the group of farm houses, encountered no
resistance in the town, and reached the bank of the river. Coming along
the road on a bicycle, getting off to push the machine when the surface
of the road became too broken, Nicholas Adams saw what had happened by
the position of the dead.

They lay alone or in clumps in the high grass of the field and along the
road, their pockets out, and over them were flies and around each body
or group of bodies were the scattered papers.

In the grass and the grain, beside the road, and in some places
scattered over the road, there was much material: a field kitchen, it
must have come over when things were going well; many of the
calf-skin-covered haversacks, stick bombs, helmets, rifles, sometimes
one butt up, the bayonet stuck in the dirt, they had dug quite a little
at the last; stick bombs, helmets, rifles, intrenching tools, ammunition
boxes, star-shell pistols, their shells scattered about, medical kits,
gas masks, empty gas-mask cans, a squat, tripodded machine gun in a nest
of empty shells, full belts protruding from the boxes, the water-cooling
can empty and on its side, the breech block gone, the crew in odd
positions, and around them, in the grass, more of the typical papers.

There were mass prayer books, group postcards showing the machine-gun
unit standing in ranked and ruddy cheerfulness as in a football picture
for a college annual; now they were humped and swollen in the grass;
propaganda postcards showing a soldier in Austrian uniform bending a
woman backward over a bed; the figures were impressionistically drawn;
very attractively depicted and had nothing in common with actual rape in
which the woman’s skirts are pulled over her head to smother her, one
comrade sometimes sitting upon the head. There were many of these
inciting cards which had evidently been issued just before the
offensive. Now they were scattered with the smutty postcards,
photographic; the small photographs of village girls by village
photographers, the occasional pictures of children, and the letters,
letters, letters. There was always much paper about the dead and the
débris of this attack was no exception.

These were new dead and no one had bothered with anything but their
pockets. Our own dead, or what he thought of, still, as our own dead,
were surprisingly few, Nick noticed. Their coats had been opened too and
their pockets were out, and they showed, by their positions, the manner
and the skill of the attack. The hot weather had swollen them all alike
regardless of nationality.

The town had evidently been defended, at the last, from the line of the
sunken road and there had been few or no Austrians to fall back into it.
There were only three bodies in the street and they looked to have been
killed running. The houses of the town were broken by the shelling and
the street had much rubble of plaster and mortar and there were broken
beams, broken tiles, and many holes, some of them yellow-edged from the
mustard gas. There were many pieces of shell, and shrapnel balls were
scattered in the rubble. There was no one in the town at all.

Nick Adams had seen no one since he had left Fornaci, although, riding
along the road through the over-foliaged country, he had seen guns
hidden under screens of mulberry leaves to the left of the road,
noticing them by the heatwaves in the air above the leaves where the sun
hit the metal. Now he went on through the town, surprised to find it
deserted, and came out on the low road beneath the bank of the river.
Leaving the town there was a bare open space where the road slanted down
and he could see the placid reach of the river and the low curve of the
opposite bank and the whitened, sun-baked mud where the Austrians had
dug. It was all very lush and over-green since he had seen it last and
becoming historical had made no change in this, the lower river.

The battalion was along the bank to the left. There was a series of
holes in the top of the bank with a few men in them. Nick noticed where
the machine guns were posted and the signal rockets in their racks. The
men in the holes in the side of the bank were sleeping. No one
challenged. He went on and as he came around a turn in the mud bank a
young second lieutenant with a stubble of beard and red-rimmed, very
blood-shot eyes pointed a pistol at him.

“Who are you?”

Nick told him.

“How do I know this?”

Nick showed him the tessera with photograph and identification and the
seal of the third army. He took hold of it.

“I will keep this.”

“You will not,” Nick said. “Give me back the card and put your gun away.
There. In the holster.”

“How am I to know who you are?”

“The tessera tells you.”

“And if the tessera is false? Give me that card.”

“Don’t be a fool,” Nick said cheerfully. “Take me to your company
commander.”

“I should send you to battalion headquarters.”

“All right,” said Nick. “Listen, do you know the Captain Paravicini? The
tall one with the small mustache who was an architect and speaks
English?”

“You know him?”

“A little.”

“What company does he command?”

“The second.”

“He is commanding the battalion.”

“Good,” said Nick. He was relieved to know that Para was all right. “Let
us go to the battalion.”

As Nick had left the edge of the town three shrapnel had burst high and
to the right over one of the wrecked houses and since then there had
been no shelling. But the face of this officer looked like the face of a
man during a bombardment. There was the same tightness and the voice did
not sound natural. His pistol made Nick nervous.

“Put it away,” he said. “There’s the whole river between them and you.”

“If I thought you were a spy I would shoot you now,” the second
lieutenant said.

“Come on,” said Nick. “Let us go to the battalion.” This officer made
him very nervous.

The Captain Paravicini, acting major, thinner and more English looking
than ever, rose when Nick saluted from behind the table in the dugout
that was battalion headquarters.

“Hello,” he said. “I didn’t know you. What are you doing in that
uniform?”

“They’ve put me in it.”

“I am very glad to see you, Nicolo.”

“Right. You look well. How was the show?”

“We made a very fine attack. Truly. A very fine attack. I will show you.
Look.”

He showed on the map how the attack had gone.

“I came from Fornaci,” Nick said. “I could see how it had been. It was
very good.”

“It was extraordinary. Altogether extraordinary. Are you attached to the
regiment?”

“No. I am supposed to move around and let them see the uniform.”

“How odd.”

“If they see one American uniform that is supposed to make them believe
others are coming.”

“But how will they know it is an American uniform?”

“You will tell them.”

“Oh. Yes, I see. I will send a corporal with you to show you about and
you will make a tour of the lines.”

“Like a bloody politician,” Nick said.

“You would be much more distinguished in civilian clothes. They are what
is really distinguished.”

“With a homburg hat,” said Nick.

“Or with a very furry fedora.”

“I’m supposed to have my pockets full of cigarettes and postal cards and
such things,” Nick said. “I should have a musette full of chocolate.
These I should distribute with a kind word and a pat on the back. But
there weren’t any cigarettes and postcards and no chocolate. So they
said to circulate around anyway.”

“I’m sure your appearance will be very heartening to the troops.”

“I wish you wouldn’t,” Nick said. “I feel badly enough about it as it
is. In principle, I would have brought you a bottle of brandy.”

“In principle,” Para said and smiled, for the first time, showing
yellowed teeth. “Such a beautiful expression. Would you like some
Grappa?”

“No, thank you,” Nick said.

“It hasn’t any ether in it.”

“I can taste that still,” Nick remembered suddenly and completely.

“You know I never knew you were drunk until you started talking coming
back in the camions.”

“I was stinking in every attack,” Nick said.

“I can’t do it,” Para said. “I took it in the first show, the very first
show, and it only made me very upset and then frightfully thirsty.”

“You don’t need it.”

“You’re much braver in an attack than I am.”

“No,” Nick said. “I know how I am and I prefer to get stinking. I’m not
ashamed of it.”

“I’ve never seen you drunk.”

“No?” said Nick. “Never? Not when we rode from Mestre to Portogrande
that night and I wanted to go to sleep and used the bicycle for a
blanket and pulled it up under my chin?”

“That wasn’t in the lines.”

“Let’s not talk about how I am,” Nick said. “It’s a subject I know too
much about to want to think about it any more.”

“You might as well stay here a while,” Paravicini said. “You can take a
nap if you like. They didn’t do much to this in the bombardment. It’s
too hot to go out yet.”

“I suppose there is no hurry.”

“How are you really?”

“I’m fine. I’m perfectly all right.”

“No. I mean really.”

“I’m all right. I can’t sleep without a light of some sort. That’s all I
have now.”

“I said it should have been trepanned. I’m no doctor but I know that.”

“Well, they thought it was better to have it absorb, and that’s what I
got. What’s the matter? I don’t seem crazy to you, do I?”

“You seem in top-hole shape.”

“It’s a hell of a nuisance once they’ve had you certified as nutty,”
Nick said. “No one ever has any confidence in you again.”

“I would take a nap, Nicolo,” Paravicini said. “This isn’t battalion
headquarters as we used to know it. We’re just waiting to be pulled out.
You oughtn’t to go out in the heat now—it’s silly. Use that bunk.”

“I might just lie down,” Nick said.

Nick lay on the bunk. He was very disappointed that he felt this way and
more disappointed, even, that it was so obvious to Captain Paravicini.
This was not as large a dugout as the one where that platoon of the
class of 1899, just out at the front, got hysterics during the
bombardment before the attack, and Para had had him walk them two at a
time outside to show them nothing would happen, he wearing his own chin
strap tight across his mouth to keep his lips quiet. Knowing they could
not hold it when they took it. Knowing it was all a bloody balls—If he
can’t stop crying, break his nose to give him something else to think
about. I’d shoot one but it’s too late now. They’d all be worse. Break
his nose. They’ve put it back to five-twenty. We’ve only got four
minutes more. Break that other silly bugger’s nose and kick his silly
ass out of here. Do you think they’ll go over? If they don’t, shoot two
and try to scoop the others out some way. Keep behind them, sergeant.
It’s no use to walk ahead and find there’s nothing coming behind you.
Bail them out as you go. What a bloody balls. All right. That’s right.
Then, looking at the watch, in that quiet tone, that valuable quiet
tone, “Savoia.” Making it cold, no time to get it, he couldn’t find his
own after the cave-in, one whole end had caved in; it was that started
them; making it cold up that slope the only time he hadn’t done it
stinking. And after they came back the teleferica house burned, it
seemed, and some of the wounded got down four days later and some did
not get down, but we went up and we went back and we came down—we
always came down. And there was Gaby Delys, oddly enough, with feathers
on; you called me baby doll a year ago tadada you said that I was rather
nice to know tadada with feathers on, with feathers off, the great Gaby,
and my name’s Harry Pilcer, too, we used to step out of the far side of
the taxis when it got steep going up the hill and he could see that hill
every night when he dreamed with Sacré Coeur, blown white, like a soap
bubble. Sometimes his girl was there and sometimes she was with some one
else and he could not understand that, but those were the nights the
river ran so much wider and stiller than it should and outside of
Fossalta there was a low house painted yellow with willows all around it
and a low stable and there was a canal, and he had been there a thousand
times and never seen it, but there it was every night as plain as the
hill, only it frightened him. That house meant more than anything and
every night he had it. That was what he needed but it frightened him
especially when the boat lay there quietly in the willows on the canal,
but the banks weren’t like this river. It was all lower, as it was at
Portogrande, where they had seen them come wallowing across the flooded
ground holding the rifles high until they fell with them in the water.
Who ordered that one? If it didn’t get so damned mixed up he could
follow it all right. That was why he noticed everything in such detail
to keep it all straight so he would know just where he was, but suddenly
it confused without reason as now, he lying in a bunk at battalion
headquarters, with Para commanding a battalion and he in a bloody
American uniform. He sat up and looked around; they all watching him.
Para was gone out. He lay down again.

The Paris part came earlier and he was not frightened of it except when
she had gone off with some one else and the fear that they might take
the same driver twice. That was what frightened about that. Never about
the front. He never dreamed about the front now any more but what
frightened him so that he could not get rid of it was that long yellow
house and the different width of the river. Now he was back here at the
river, he had gone through that same town, and there was no house. Nor
was the river that way. Then where did he go each night and what was the
peril, and why would he wake, soaking wet, more frightened than he had
ever been in a bombardment, because of a house and a long stable and a
canal?

He sat up, swung his legs carefully down; they stiffened any time they
were out straight for long; returned the stares of the adjutant, the
signallers and the two runners by the door and put on his cloth-covered
trench helmet.

“I regret the absence of the chocolate, the postal-cards and
cigarettes,” he said. “I am, however, wearing the uniform.”

“The major is coming back at once,” the adjutant said. In that army an
adjutant is not a commissioned officer.

“The uniform is not very correct,” Nick told them. “But it gives you the
idea. There will be several millions of Americans here shortly.”

“Do you think they will send Americans down here?” asked the adjutant.

“Oh, absolutely. Americans twice as large as myself, healthy, with clean
hearts, sleep at night, never been wounded, never been blown up, never
had their heads caved in, never been scared, don’t drink, faithful to
the girls they left behind them, many of them never had crabs, wonderful
chaps. You’ll see.”

“Are you an Italian?” asked the adjutant.

“No, American. Look at the uniform. Spagnolini made it but it’s not
quite correct.”

“A North or South American?”

“North,” said Nick. He felt it coming on now. He would quiet down.

“But you speak Italian.”

“Why not? Do you mind if I speak Italian? Haven’t I a right to speak
Italian?”

“You have Italian medals.”

“Just the ribbons and the papers. The medals come later. Or you give
them to people to keep and the people go away; or they are lost with
your baggage. You can purchase others in Milan. It is the papers that
are of importance. You must not feel badly about them. You will have
some yourself if you stay at the front long enough.”

“I am a veteran of the Iritrea campaign,” said the adjutant stiffly. “I
fought in Tripoli.”

“It’s quite something to have met you,” Nick put out his hand. “Those
must have been trying days. I noticed the ribbons. Were you, by any
chance, on the Carso?”

“I have just been called up for this war. My class was too old.”

“At one time I was under the age limit,” Nick said. “But now I am
reformed out of the war.”

“But why are you here now?”

“I am demonstrating the American uniform,” Nick said. “Don’t you think
it is very significant? It is a little tight in the collar but soon you
will see untold millions wearing this uniform swarming like locusts. The
grasshopper, you know, what we call the grasshopper in America, is
really a locust. The true grasshopper is small and green and
comparatively feeble. You must not, however, make a confusion with the
seven-year locust or cicada which emits a peculiar sustained sound which
at the moment I cannot recall. I try to recall it but I cannot. I can
almost hear it and then it is quite gone. You will pardon me if I break
off our conversation?”

“See if you can find the major,” the adjutant said to one of the two
runners. “I can see you have been wounded,” he said to Nick.

“In various places,” Nick said. “If you are interested in scars I can
show you some very interesting ones but I would rather talk about
grasshoppers. What we call grasshoppers that is; and what are, really,
locusts. These insects at one time played a very important part in my
life. It might interest you and you can look at the uniform while I am
talking.”

The adjutant made a motion with his hand to the second runner who went
out.

“Fix your eyes on the uniform. Spagnolini made it, you know. You might
as well look, too,” Nick said to the signallers. “I really have no rank.
We’re under the American consul. It’s perfectly all right for you to
look. You can stare, if you like. I will tell you about the American
locust. We always preferred one that we called the medium-brown. They
last the best in the water and fish prefer them. The larger ones that
fly making a noise somewhat similar to that produced by a rattlesnake
rattling his rattlers, a very dry sound, have vivid colored wings, some
are bright red, others yellow barred with black, but their wings go to
pieces in the water and they make a very blowsy bait, while the
medium-brown is a plump, compact, succulent hopper that I can recommend
as far as one may well recommend something you gentlemen will probably
never encounter. But I must insist that you will never gather a
sufficient supply of these insects for a day’s fishing by pursuing them
with your hands or trying to hit them with a hat. That is sheer nonsense
and a useless waste of time. I repeat, gentlemen, that you will get
nowhere at it. The correct procedure, and one which should be taught all
young officers at every small-arms course if I had anything to say about
it, and who knows but what I will have, is the employment of a seine or
net made of common mosquito netting. Two officers holding this length of
netting at alternate ends, or let us say one at each end, stoop, hold
the bottom extremity of the net in one hand and the top extremity in the
other and run into the wind. The hoppers, flying with the wind, fly
against the length of netting and are imprisoned in its folds. It is no
trick at all to catch a very great quantity indeed, and no officer, in
my opinion, should be without a length of mosquito netting suitable for
the improvisation of one of these grasshopper seines. I hope I have made
myself clear, gentlemen. Are there any questions? If there is anything
in the course you do not understand please ask questions. Speak up.
None? Then I would like to close on this note. In the words of that
great soldier and gentleman, Sir Henry Wilson: Gentlemen, either you
must govern or you must be governed. Let me repeat it. Gentlemen, there
is one thing I would like to have you remember. One thing I would like
you to take with you as you leave this room. Gentlemen, either you must
govern—or you must be governed. That is all, gentlemen. Good-day.”

He removed his cloth-covered helmet, put it on again and, stooping, went
out the low entrance of the dugout. Para, accompanied by the two
runners, was coming down the line of the sunken road. It was very hot in
the sun and Nick removed the helmet.

“There ought to be a system for wetting these things,” he said. “I shall
wet this one in the river.” He started up the bank.

“Nicolo,” Paravicini called. “Nicolo. Where are you going?”

“I don’t really have to go.” Nick came down the slope, holding the
helmet in his hands. “They’re a damned nuisance wet or dry. Do you wear
yours all the time?”

“All the time,” said Para. “It’s making me bald. Come inside.”

Inside Para told him to sit down.

“You know they’re absolutely no damned good,” Nick said. “I remember
when they were a comfort when we first had them, but I’ve seen them full
of brains too many times.”

“Nicolo,” Para said. “I think you should go back. I think it would be
better if you didn’t come up to the line until you had those supplies.
There’s nothing here for you to do. If you move around, even with
something worth giving away, the men will group and that invites
shelling. I won’t have it.”

“I know it’s silly,” Nick said. “It wasn’t my idea. I heard the brigade
was here so I thought I would see you or some one else I knew. I could
have gone to Zenzon or to San Dona. I’d like to go to San Dona to see
the bridge again.”

“I won’t have you circulating around to no purpose,” Captain Paravicini
said.

“All right,” said Nick. He felt it coming on again.

“You understand?”

“Of course,” said Nick. He was trying to hold it in.

“Anything of that sort should be done at night.”

“Naturally,” said Nick. He knew he could not stop it now.

“You see, I am commanding the battalion,” Para said.

“And why shouldn’t you be?” Nick said. Here it came. “You can read and
write, can’t you?”

“Yes,” said Para gently.

“The trouble is you have a damned small battalion to command. As soon as
it gets to strength again they’ll give you back your company. Why don’t
they bury the dead? I’ve seen them now. I don’t care about seeing them
again. They can bury them any time as far as I’m concerned and it would
be much better for you. You’ll all get bloody sick.”

“Where did you leave your bicycle?”

“Inside the last house.”

“Do you think it will be all right?”

“Don’t worry,” Nick said. “I’ll go in a little while.”

“Lie down a little while, Nicolo.”

“All right.”

He shut his eyes, and in place of the man with the beard who looked at
him over the sights of the rifle, quite calmly before squeezing off, the
white flash and clublike impact, on his knees, hot-sweet choking,
coughing it onto the rock while they went past him, he saw a long,
yellow house with a low stable and the river much wider than it was and
stiller. “Christ,” he said, “I might as well go.”

He stood up.

“I’m going, Para,” he said. “I’ll ride back now in the afternoon. If any
supplies have come I’ll bring them down tonight. If not I’ll come at
night when I have something to bring.”

“It is still hot to ride,” Captain Paravicini said.

“You don’t need to worry,” Nick said. “I’m all right now for quite a
while. I had one then but it was easy. They’re getting much better. I
can tell when I’m going to have one because I talk so much.”

“I’ll send a runner with you.”

“I’d rather you didn’t. I know the way.”

“You’ll be back soon?”

“Absolutely.”

“Let me send——”

“No,” said Nick. “As a mark of confidence.”

“Well, Ciaou then.”

“Ciaou,” said Nick. He started back along the sunken road toward where
he had left the bicycle. In the afternoon the road would be shady once
he had passed the canal. Beyond that there were trees on both sides that
had not been shelled at all. It was on that stretch that, marching, they
had once passed the Terza Savoia cavalry regiment riding in the snow
with their lances. The horses’ breath made plumes in the cold air. No,
that was somewhere else. Where was that?

“I’d better get to that damned bicycle,” Nick said to himself. “I don’t
want to lose the way to Fornaci.”




                         THE MOTHER OF A QUEEN


When his father died he was only a kid and his manager buried him
perpetually. That is, so he would have the plot permanently. But when
his mother died his manager thought they might not always be so hot on
each other. They were sweethearts; sure he’s a queen, didn’t you know
that, of course he is. So he just buried her for five years.

Well, when he came back to Mexico from Spain he got the first notice. It
said it was the first notice that the five years were up and would he
make arrangements for the continuing of his mother’s grave. It was only
twenty dollars for perpetual. I had the cash box then and I said let me
attend to it, Paco. But he said no, he would look after it. He’d look
after it right away. It was his mother and he wanted to do it himself.

Then in a week he got the second notice. I read it to him and I said I
thought he had looked after it.

No, he said, he hadn’t.

“Let me do it,” I said. “It’s right here in the cash box.”

No, he said. Nobody could tell him what to do. He’d do it himself when
he got around to it. “What’s the sense in spending money sooner than
necessary?”

“All right,” I said, “but see you look after it.” At this time he had a
contract for six fights at four thousand pesos a fight besides his
benefit fight. He made over fifteen thousand dollars there in the
capital alone. He was just tight, that’s all.

The third notice came in another week and I read it to him. It said that
if he did not make the payment by the following Saturday his mother’s
grave would be opened and her remains dumped on the common boneheap. He
said he would go attend to it that afternoon when he went to town.

“Why not have me do it?” I asked him.

“Keep out of my business,” he said. “It’s my business and I’m going to
do it.”

“All right, if that’s the way you feel about it,” I said. “Do your own
business.”

He got the money out of the cash box, although then he always carried a
hundred or more pesos with him all the time, and he said he would look
after it. He went out with the money and so of course I thought he had
attended to it.

A week later the notice came that they had no response to the final
warning and so his mother’s body had been dumped on the boneheap; on the
public boneheap.

“Jesus Christ,” I said to him, “you said you’d pay that and you took
money out of the cash box to do it and now what’s happened to your
mother? My God, think of it! The public boneheap and your own mother.
Why didn’t you let me look after it? I would have sent it when the first
notice came.”

“It’s none of your business. It’s _my_ mother.”

“It’s none of _my_ business, yes, but it was _your_ business. What kind
of blood is it in a man that will let that be done to his mother? You
don’t deserve to have a mother.”

“It is my mother,” he said. “Now she is so much dearer to me. Now I
don’t have to think of her buried in one place and be sad. Now she is
all about me in the air, like the birds and the flowers. Now she will
always be with me.”

“Jesus Christ,” I said, “what kind of blood have you anyway? I don’t
want you to even speak to me.”

“She is all around me,” he said. “Now I will never be sad.”

At that time he was spending all kinds of money around women trying to
make himself seem a man and fool people, but it didn’t have any effect
on people that knew anything about him. He owed me over six hundred
pesos and he wouldn’t pay me. “Why do you want it now?” he’d say. “Don’t
you trust me? Aren’t we friends?”

“It isn’t friends or trusting you. It’s that I paid the accounts out of
my own money while you were away and now I need the money back and you
have it to pay me.”

“I haven’t got it.”

“You have it,” I said. “It’s in the cash box now and you can pay me.”

“I need that money for something,” he said. “You don’t know all the
needs I have for money.”

“I stayed here all the time you were in Spain and you authorized me to
pay these things as they came up, all these things of the house, and you
didn’t send any money while you were gone and I paid over six hundred
pesos in my own money and now I need it and you can pay me.”

“I’ll pay you soon,” he said. “Right now I need the money badly.”

“For what?”

“For my own business.”

“Why don’t you pay me some on account?”

“I can’t,” he said. “I need that money too badly. But I will pay you.”

He had only fought twice in Spain, they couldn’t stand him there, they
saw through him quick enough, and he had seven new fighting suits made
and this is the kind of thing he was: he had them packed so badly that
four of them were ruined by sea water on the trip back and he couldn’t
even wear them.

“My God,” I said to him, “you go to Spain. You stay there the whole
season and only fight two times. You spend all the money you took with
you on suits and then have them spoiled by salt water so you can’t wear
them. That is the kind of season you have and then you talk to me about
running your own business. Why don’t you pay me the money you owe me so
I can leave?”

“I want you here,” he said, “and I will pay you. But now I need the
money.”

“You need it too badly to pay for your own mother’s grave to keep your
mother buried. Don’t you?” I said.

“I am happy about what has happened to my mother,” he said. “You cannot
understand.”

“Thank Christ I can’t,” I said. “You pay me what you owe me or I will
take it out of the cash box.”

“I will keep the cash box myself,” he said.

“No, you won’t,” I said.

That very afternoon he came to me with a punk, some fellow from his own
town who was broke, and said, “Here is a paesano who needs money to go
home because his mother is very sick.” This fellow was just a punk, you
understand, a nobody he’d never seen before, but from his home town, and
he wanted to be the big, generous matador with a fellow townsman.

“Give him fifty pesos from the cash box,” he told me.

“You just told me you had no money to pay me,” I said. “And now you want
to give fifty pesos to this punk.”

“He is a fellow townsman,” he said, “and he is in distress.”

“You bitch,” I said. I gave him the key of the cash box. “Get it
yourself. I’m going to town.”

“Don’t be angry,” he said. “I’m going to pay you.”

I got the car out to go to town. It was his car but he knew I drove it
better than he did. Everything he did I could do better. He knew it. He
couldn’t even read and write. I was going to see somebody and see what I
could do about making him pay me. He came out and said, “I’m coming with
you and I’m going to pay you. We are good friends. There is no need to
quarrel.”

We drove into the city and I was driving. Just before we came into the
town he pulled out twenty pesos.

“Here’s the money,” he said.

“You motherless bitch,” I said to him and told him what he could do with
the money. “You give fifty pesos to that punk and then offer me twenty
when you owe me six hundred. I wouldn’t take a nickel from you. You know
what you can do with it.”

I got out of the car without a peso in my pocket and I didn’t know where
I was going to sleep that night. Later I went out with a friend and got
my things from his place. I never spoke to him again until this year. I
met him walking with three friends in the evening on the way to the
Callao cinema in the Gran Via in Madrid. He put his hand out to me.

“Hello Roger, old friend,” he said to me. “How are you? People say you
are talking against me. That you say all sorts of unjust things about
me.”

“All I say is you never had a mother,” I said to him. That’s the worst
thing you can say to insult a man in Spanish.

“That’s true,” he said. “My poor mother died when I was so young it
seems as though I never had a mother. It’s very sad.”

There’s a queen for you. You can’t touch them. Nothing, nothing can
touch them. They spend money on themselves or for vanity, but they never
pay. Try to get one to pay. I told him what I thought of him right there
on the Gran Via, in front of three friends, but he speaks to me now when
I meet him as though we were friends. What kind of blood is it that
makes a man like that?




                           ONE READER WRITES


She sat at the table in her bedroom with a newspaper folded open before
her and only stopping to look out of the window at the snow which was
falling and melting on the roof as it fell. She wrote this letter,
writing it steadily with no necessity to cross out or rewrite anything.

                                                   Roanoke, Virginia
                                                    February 6, 1933
    Dear Doctor—

    May I write you for some very important advice—I have a
    decision to make and don’t know just whom to trust most I dare
    not ask my parents—and so I come to you—and only because I
    need not see you, can I confide in you even. Now here is the
    situation—I married a man in U. S. service in 1929 and that
    same year he was sent to China, Shanghai—he staid three
    years—and came home—he was discharged from the service some
    few months ago—and went to his mother’s home in Helena,
    Arkansas. He wrote for me to come home—I went, and found he is
    taking a course of injections and I naturally ask, and found he
    is being treated for I don’t know how to spell the word but it
    sound like this “sifilus”—Do you know what I mean—now tell me
    will it ever be safe for me to live with him again—I did not
    come in close contact with him at any time since his return from
    China. He assures me he will be O K after this doctor finishes
    with him—Do you think it right—I often heard my Father say one
    could well wish themselves dead if once they become a victim of
    that malady—I believe my Father but want to believe my Husband
    most—Please, please tell me what to do—I have a daughter born
    while her Father was in China—

    Thanking you and trusting wholly in your advice I am

and signed her name.

Maybe he can tell me what’s right to do, she said to herself. Maybe he
can tell me. In the picture in the paper he looks like he’d know. He
looks smart, all right. Every day he tells somebody what to do. He ought
to know. I want to do whatever is right. It’s such a long time though.
It’s a long time. And it’s been a long time. My Christ, it’s been a long
time. He had to go wherever they sent him, I know, but I don’t know what
he had to get it for. Oh, I wish to Christ he wouldn’t have got it. I
don’t care what he did to get it. But I wish to Christ he hadn’t ever
got it. It does seem like he didn’t have to have got it. I don’t know
what to do. I wish to Christ he hadn’t got any kind of malady. I don’t
know why he had to get a malady.




                         HOMAGE TO SWITZERLAND


                                 PART I

                  PORTRAIT OF MR. WHEELER IN MONTREUX

Inside the station café it was warm and light. The wood of the tables
shone from wiping and there were baskets of pretzels in glazed paper
sacks. The chairs were carved, but the seats were worn and comfortable.
There was a carved wooden clock on the wall and a bar at the far end of
the room. Outside the window it was snowing.

Two of the station porters sat drinking new wine at the table under the
clock. Another porter came in and said the Simplon-Orient Express was an
hour late at Saint Maurice. He went out. The waitress came over to Mr.
Wheeler’s table.

“The Express is an hour late, sir,” she said. “Can I bring you some
coffee?”

“If you think it won’t keep me awake.”

“Please?” asked the waitress.

“Bring me some,” said Mr. Wheeler.

“Thank you.”

She brought the coffee from the kitchen and Mr. Wheeler looked out the
window at the snow falling in the light from the station platform.

“Do you speak other languages besides English?” he asked the waitress.

“Oh, yes, sir. I speak German and French and the dialects.”

“Would you like a drink of something?”

“Oh, no, sir. It is not permitted to drink in the café with the
clients.”

“You won’t take a cigar?”

“Oh, no, sir. I don’t smoke, sir.”

“That is all right,” said Mr. Wheeler. He looked out of the window
again, drank the coffee, and lit a cigarette.

“Fräulein,” he called. The waitress came over.

“What would you like, sir?”

“You,” he said.

“You must not joke me like that.”

“I’m not joking.”

“Then you must not say it.”

“I haven’t time to argue,” Mr. Wheeler said. “The train comes in forty
minutes. If you’ll go upstairs with me I’ll give you a hundred francs.”

“You should not say such things, sir. I will ask the porter to speak
with you.”

“I don’t want a porter,” Mr. Wheeler said. “Nor a policeman nor one of
those boys that sell cigarettes. I want you.”

“If you talk like that you must go out. You cannot stay here and talk
like that.”

“Why don’t you go away, then? If you go away I can’t talk to you.”

The waitress went away. Mr. Wheeler watched to see if she spoke to the
porters. She did not.

“Mademoiselle!” he called. The waitress came over. “Bring me a bottle of
Sion, please.”

“Yes, sir.”

Mr. Wheeler watched her go out, then come in with the wine and bring it
to his table. He looked toward the clock.

“I’ll give you two hundred francs,” he said.

“Please do not say such things.”

“Two hundred francs is a great deal of money.”

“You will not say such things!” the waitress said. She was losing her
English. Mr. Wheeler looked at her interestedly.

“Two hundred francs.”

“You are hateful.”

“Why don’t you go away, then? I can’t talk to you if you’re not here.”

The waitress left the table and went over to the bar. Mr. Wheeler drank
the wine and smiled to himself for some time.

“Mademoiselle,” he called. The waitress pretended not to hear him.
“Mademoiselle,” he called again. The waitress came over.

“You wish something?”

“Very much. I’ll give you three hundred francs.”

“You are hateful.”

“Three hundred francs Swiss.”

She went away and Mr. Wheeler looked after her. A porter opened the
door. He was the one who had Mr. Wheeler’s bags in his charge.

“The train is coming, sir,” he said in French. Mr. Wheeler stood up.

“Mademoiselle,” he called. The waitress came toward the table. “How much
is the wine?”

“Seven francs.”

Mr. Wheeler counted out eight francs and left them on the table. He put
on his coat and followed the porter onto the platform where the snow was
falling.

“Au revoir, mademoiselle,” he said. The waitress watched him go. He’s
ugly, she thought, ugly and hateful. Three hundred francs for a thing
that is nothing to do. How many times have I done that for nothing. And
no place to go here. If he had sense he would know there was no place.
No time and no place to go. Three hundred francs to do that. What people
those Americans.

Standing on the cement platform beside his bags, looking down the rails
toward the headlight of the train coming through the snow, Mr. Wheeler
was thinking that it was very inexpensive sport. He had only spent,
actually, aside from the dinner, seven francs for a bottle of wine and a
franc for the tip. Seventy-five centimes would have been better. He
would have felt better now if the tip had been seventy-five centimes.
One franc Swiss is five francs French. Mr. Wheeler was headed for Paris.
He was very careful about money and did not care for women. He had been
in that station before and he knew there was no upstairs to go to. Mr.
Wheeler never took chances.


                                PART II

                  MR. JOHNSON TALKS ABOUT IT AT VEVEY

Inside the station café it was warm and light; the tables were shiny
from wiping and on some there were red and white striped table cloths;
and there were blue and white striped table cloths on the others and on
all of them baskets with pretzels in glazed paper sacks. The chairs were
carved but the wood seats were worn and comfortable. There was a clock
on the wall, a zinc bar at the far end of the room, and outside the
window it was snowing. Two of the station porters sat drinking new wine
at the table under the clock.

Another porter came in and said the Simplon-Orient Express was an hour
late at Saint Maurice. The waitress came over to Mr. Johnson’s table.

“The Express is an hour late, sir,” she said. “Can I bring you some
coffee?”

“If it’s not too much trouble.”

“Please?” asked the waitress.

“I’ll take some.”

“Thank you.”

She brought the coffee from the kitchen and Mr. Johnson looked out the
window at the snow falling in the light from the station platform.

“Do you speak other languages besides English?” he asked the waitress.

“Oh, yes, I speak German and French and the dialects.”

“Would you like a drink of something?”

“Oh, no, sir, it is not permitted to drink in the café with the
clients.”

“Have a cigar?”

“Oh, no, sir,” she laughed. “I don’t smoke, sir.”

“Neither do I,” said Johnson. “It’s a dirty habit.”

The waitress went away and Johnson lit a cigarette and drank the coffee.
The clock on the wall marked a quarter to ten. His watch was a little
fast. The train was due at ten-thirty—an hour late meant eleven-thirty.
Johnson called to the waitress.

“Signorina!”

“What would you like, sir?”

“You wouldn’t like to play with me?” Johnson asked. The waitress
blushed.

“No, sir.”

“I don’t mean anything violent. You wouldn’t like to make up a party and
see the night life of Vevey? Bring a girl friend if you like.”

“I must work” the waitress said. “I have my duty here.”

“I know,” said Johnson. “But couldn’t you get a substitute? They used to
do that in the Civil War.”

“Oh, no, sir. I must be here myself in the person.”

“Where did you learn your English?”

“At the Berlitz school, sir.”

“Tell me about it,” Johnson said. “Were the Berlitz undergraduates a
wild lot? What about all this necking and petting? Were there many
smoothies? Did you ever run into Scott Fitzgerald?”

“Please?”

“I mean were your college days the happiest days of your life? What sort
of team did Berlitz have last fall?”

“You are joking, sir?”

“Only feebly,” said Johnson. “You’re an awfully good girl. And you don’t
want to play with me?”

“Oh, no, sir,” said the waitress. “Would you like me to bring you
something?”

“Yes,” said Johnson. “Would you bring me the wine list?”

“Yes, sir.”

Johnson walked over with the wine list to the table where the three
porters sat. They looked up at him. They were old men.

“Wollen Sie trinken?” he asked. One of them nodded and smiled.

“Oui, monsieur.”

“You speak French?”

“Oui, monsieur.”

“What shall we drink? Connais vous des champagnes?”

“Non, monsieur.”

“Faut les connaître,” said Johnson. “Fräulein,” he called the waitress.
“We will drink champagne.”

“Which champagne would you prefer, sir?”

“The best,” said Johnson. “Laquelle est le best?” he asked the porters.

“Le meillieur?” asked the porter who had spoken first.

“By all means.”

The porter took out a pair of gold-rimmed glasses from his coat pocket
and looked over the list. He ran his finger down the four typewritten
names and prices.

“Sportsman,” he said. “Sportsman is the best.”

“You agree, gentlemen?” Johnson asked the other porters. The one porter
nodded. The other said in French, “I don’t know them personally but I’ve
often heard speak of Sportsman. It’s good.”

“A bottle of Sportsman,” Johnson said to the waitress. He looked at the
price on the wine card: eleven francs Swiss. “Make it two Sportsmen. Do
you mind if I sit here with you?” he asked the porter who had suggested
Sportsman.

“Sit down. Put yourself here, please.” The porter smiled at him. He was
folding his spectacles and putting them away in their case. “Is it the
gentleman’s birthday?”

“No,” said Johnson. “It’s not a fête. My wife has decided to divorce
me.”

“So,” said the porter. “I hope not.” The other porter shook his head.
The third porter seemed a little deaf.

“It is doubtless a common experience,” said Johnson, “like the first
visit to the dentist or the first time a girl is unwell, but I have been
upset.”

“It is understandable,” said the oldest porter. “I understand it.”

“None of you gentlemen is divorced?” Johnson asked. He had stopped
clowning with the language and was speaking good French now and had been
for some time.

“No,” said the porter who had ordered Sportsman. “They don’t divorce
much here. There are gentlemen who are divorced but not many.”

“With us,” said Johnson, “it’s different. Practically every one is
divorced.”

“That’s true,” the porter confirmed. “I’ve read it in the paper.”

“I myself am somewhat in retard,” Johnson went on. “This is the first
time I have been divorced. I am thirty-five.”

“Mais vous êtes encore jeune,” said the porter. He explained to the two
others. “Monsieur n’a que trente-cinq ans.” The other porters nodded.
“He’s very young,” said one.

“And it is really the first time you’ve been divorced?” asked the
porter.

“Absolutely,” said Johnson. “Please open the wine, mademoiselle.”

“And is it very expensive?”

“Ten thousand francs.”

“Swiss money?”

“No, French money.”

“Oh, yes. Two thousand francs Swiss. All the same it’s not cheap.”

“No.”

“And why does one do it?”

“One is asked to.”

“But why do they ask that?”

“To marry some one else.”

“But it’s idiotic.”

“I agree with you,” said Johnson. The waitress filled the four glasses.
They all raised them.

“Prosit,” said Johnson.

“A votre santé, monsieur,” said the porter. The other two porters said
“Salut.” The champagne tasted like sweet pink cider.

“Is it a system always to respond in a different language in
Switzerland?” Johnson asked.

“No,” said the porter. “French is more cultivated. Besides, this is la
Suisse Romande.”

“But you speak German?”

“Yes. Where I come from they speak German.”

“I see,” said Johnson, “and you say you have never been divorced?”

“No. It would be too expensive. Besides I have never married.”

“Ah,” said Johnson. “And these other gentlemen?”

“They are married.”

“You like being married?” Johnson asked one of the porters.

“What?”

“You like the married state?”

“Oui. C’est normale.”

“Exactly,” said Johnson. “Et vous, monsieur?”

“Ça va,” said the other porter.

“Pour moi,” said Johnson, “ça ne va pas.”

“Monsieur is going to divorce,” the first porter explained.

“Oh,” said the second porter.

“Ah ha,” the third porter said.

“Well,” said Johnson, “the subject seems to be exhausted. You’re not
interested in my troubles,” he addressed the first porter.

“But, yes,” said the porter.

“Well, let’s talk about something else.”

“As you wish.”

“What can we talk about?”

“You do the sport?”

“No,” said Johnson. “My wife does, though.”

“What do you do for amusement?”

“I am a writer.”

“Does that make much money?”

“No. But later on when you get known it does.”

“It is interesting.”

“No,” said Johnson, “it is not interesting. I am sorry, gentlemen, but I
have to leave you. Will you please drink the other bottle?”

“But the train does not come for three quarters of an hour.”

“I know,” said Johnson. The waitress came and he paid for the wine and
his dinner.

“You’re going out, sir?” she asked.

“Yes,” said Johnson, “just for a little walk. I’ll leave my bags here.”

He put on his muffler, his coat, and his hat. Outside the snow was
falling heavily. He looked back through the window at the three porters
sitting at the table. The waitress was filling their glasses from the
last wine of the opened bottle. She took the unopened bottle back to the
bar. That makes them three francs something apiece, Johnson thought. He
turned and walked down the platform. Inside the café he had thought that
talking about it would blunt it; but it had not blunted it; it had only
made him feel nasty.


                                PART III

                 THE SON OF A FELLOW MEMBER AT TERRITET

In the station café at Territet it was a little too warm; the lights
were bright and the tables shiny from polishing. There were baskets with
pretzels in glazed paper sacks on the tables and cardboard pads for beer
glasses in order that the moist glasses would not make rings on the
wood. The chairs were carved but the wooden seats were worn and quite
comfortable. There was a clock on the wall, a bar at the far end of the
room, and outside the window it was snowing. There was an old man
drinking coffee at a table under the clock and reading the evening
paper. A porter came in and said the Simplon-Orient Express was an hour
late at Saint Maurice. The waitress came over to Mr. Harris’s table. Mr.
Harris had just finished dinner.

“The Express is an hour late, sir. Can I bring you some coffee?”

“If you like.”

“Please?” asked the waitress.

“All right,” said Mr. Harris.

“Thank you, sir,” said the waitress.

She brought the coffee from the kitchen and Mr. Harris put sugar in it,
crunched the lumps with his spoon, and looked out the window at the snow
falling in the light from the station platform.

“Do you speak other languages besides English?” he asked the waitress.

“Oh, yes, sir. I speak German and French and the dialects.”

“Which do you like best?”

“They are all very much the same, sir. I can’t say I like one better
than another.”

“Would you like a drink of something or a coffee?”

“Oh, no, sir, it is not permitted to drink in the café with the
clients.”

“You wouldn’t take a cigar?”

“Oh, no, sir,” she laughed. “I don’t smoke, sir.”

“Neither do I,” said Harris, “I don’t agree with David Belasco.”

“Please?”

“Belasco. David Belasco. You can always tell him because he has his
collar on backwards. But I don’t agree with him. Then, too, he’s dead
now.”

“Will you excuse me, sir?” asked the waitress.

“Absolutely,” said Harris. He sat forward in the chair and looked out of
the window. Across the room the old man had folded his paper. He looked
at Mr. Harris and then picked up his coffee cup and saucer and walked to
Harris’s table.

“I beg your pardon if I intrude,” he said in English, “but it has just
occurred to me that you might be a member of the National Geographic
Society.”

“Please sit down,” Harris said. The gentleman sat down.

“Won’t you have another coffee or a liqueur?”

“Thank you,” said the gentleman.

“Won’t you have a kirsch with me?”

“Perhaps. But you must have it with me.”

“No, I insist.” Harris called the waitress. The old gentleman took out
from an inside pocket of his coat a leather pocketbook. He took off a
wide rubber band and drew out several papers, selected one, and handed
it to Harris.

“That is my certificate of membership,” he said. “Do you know Frederick
J. Roussel in America?”

“I’m afraid I don’t.”

“I believe he is very prominent.”

“Where does he come from? Do you know what part of the States?”

“From Washington, of course. Isn’t that the headquarters of the
Society?”

“I believe it is.”

“You believe it is. Aren’t you sure?”

“I’ve been away a long time,” Harris said.

“You’re not a member, then?”

“No. But my father is. He’s been a member for a great many years.”

“Then he would know Frederick J. Roussel. He is one of the officers of
the society. You will observe that it is by Mr. Roussel that I was
nominated for membership.”

“I’m awfully glad.”

“I am sorry you are not a member. But you could obtain nomination
through your father?”

“I think so,” said Harris. “I must when I go back.”

“I would advise you to,” said the gentleman. “You see the magazine, of
course?”

“Absolutely.”

“Have you seen the number with the colored plates of the North American
fauna?”

“Yes. I have it in Paris.”

“And the number containing the panorama of the volcanoes of Alaska?”

“That was a wonder.”

“I enjoyed very much, too, the wild animal photographs of George Shiras
three.”

“They were damned fine.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“They were excellent. That fellow Shiras——”

“You call him that fellow?”

“We’re old friends,” said Harris.

“I see. You know George Shiras three. He must be very interesting.”

“He is. He’s about the most interesting man I know.”

“And do you know George Shiras two? Is he interesting too?”

“Oh, he’s not so interesting.”

“I should imagine he would be very interesting.”

“You know, a funny thing. He’s not so interesting. I’ve often wondered
why.”

“H’m,” said the gentleman. “I should have thought any one in that family
would be interesting.”

“Do you remember the panorama of the Sahara Desert?” Harris asked.

“The Sahara Desert? That was nearly fifteen years ago.”

“That’s right. That was one of my father’s favorites.”

“He doesn’t prefer the newer numbers?”

“He probably does. But he was very fond of the Sahara panorama.”

“It was excellent. But to me its artistic value far exceeded its
scientific interest.”

“I don’t know,” said Harris. “The wind blowing all that sand and that
Arab with his camel kneeling toward Mecca.”

“As I recall, the Arab was standing holding the camel.”

“You’re quite right,” said Harris. “I was thinking of Colonel Lawrence’s
book.”

“Lawrence’s book deals with Arabia, I believe.”

“Absolutely,” said Harris. “It was the Arab reminded me of it.”

“He must be a very interesting young man.”

“I believe he is.”

“Do you know what he is doing now?”

“He’s in the Royal Air Force.”

“And why does he do that?”

“He likes it.”

“Do you know if he belongs to the National Geographic Society?”

“I wonder if he does.”

“He would make a very good member. He is the sort of person they want as
a member. I would be very happy to nominate him if you think they would
like to have him.”

“I think they would.”

“I have nominated a scientist from Vevey and a colleague of mine from
Lauzanne and they were both elected. I believe they would be very
pleased if I nominated Colonel Lawrence.”

“It’s a splendid idea,” said Harris. “Do you come here to the café
often?”

“I come here for coffee after dinner.”

“Are you in the University?”

“I am not active any longer.”

“I’m just waiting for the train,” said Harris. “I’m going up to Paris
and sail from Havre for the States.”

“I have never been to America. But I would like to go very much. Perhaps
I shall attend a meeting of the society some time. I would be very happy
to meet your father.”

“I’m sure he would have liked to meet you but he died last year. Shot
himself, oddly enough.”

“I am very truly sorry. I am sure his loss was a blow to science as well
as to his family.”

“Science took it awfully well.”

“This is my card,” Harris said. “His initials were E. J. instead of E.
D. I know he would have liked to know you.”

“It would have been a great pleasure.” The gentleman took out a card
from the pocketbook and gave it to Harris. It read:

                       DR. SIGISMUND WYER, PH. D.

                   Member of the National Geographic
                  Society, Washington, D. C., U. S. A.

“I will keep it very carefully,” Harris said.




                              A DAY’S WAIT


He came into the room to shut the windows while we were still in bed and
I saw he looked ill. He was shivering, his face was white, and he walked
slowly as though it ached to move.

“What’s the matter, Schatz?”

“I’ve got a headache.”

“You better go back to bed.”

“No. I’m all right.”

“You go to bed. I’ll see you when I’m dressed.”

But when I came downstairs he was dressed, sitting by the fire, looking
a very sick and miserable boy of nine years. When I put my hand on his
forehead I knew he had a fever.

“You go up to bed,” I said, “you’re sick.”

“I’m all right,” he said.

When the doctor came he took the boy’s temperature.

“What is it?” I asked him.

“One hundred and two.”

Downstairs, the doctor left three different medicines in different
colored capsules with instructions for giving them. One was to bring
down the fever, another a purgative, the third to overcome an acid
condition. The germs of influenza can only exist in an acid condition,
he explained. He seemed to know all about influenza and said there was
nothing to worry about if the fever did not go above one hundred and
four degrees. This was a light epidemic of flu and there was no danger
if you avoided pneumonia.

Back in the room I wrote the boy’s temperature down and made a note of
the time to give the various capsules.

“Do you want me to read to you?”

“All right. If you want to,” said the boy. His face was very white and
there were dark areas under his eyes. He lay still in the bed and seemed
very detached from what was going on.

I read aloud from Howard Pyle’s _Book of Pirates_; but I could see he
was not following what I was reading.

“How do you feel, Schatz?” I asked him.

“Just the same, so far,” he said.

I sat at the foot of the bed and read to myself while I waited for it to
be time to give another capsule. It would have been natural for him to
go to sleep, but when I looked up he was looking at the foot of the bed,
looking very strangely.

“Why don’t you try to go to sleep? I’ll wake you up for the medicine.”

“I’d rather stay awake.”

After a while he said to me, “You don’t have to stay in here with me,
Papa, if it bothers you.”

“It doesn’t bother me.”

“No, I mean you don’t have to stay if it’s going to bother you.”

I thought perhaps he was a little lightheaded and after giving him the
prescribed capsules at eleven o’clock I went out for a while. It was a
bright, cold day, the ground covered with a sleet that had frozen so
that it seemed as if all the bare trees, the bushes, the cut brush and
all the grass and the bare ground had been varnished with ice. I took
the young Irish setter for a little walk up the road and along a frozen
creek, but it was difficult to stand or walk on the glassy surface and
the red dog slipped and slithered and I fell twice, hard, once dropping
my gun and having it slide away over the ice.

We flushed a covey of quail under a high clay bank with overhanging
brush and I killed two as they went out of sight over the top of the
bank. Some of the covey lit in trees, but most of them scattered into
brush piles and it was necessary to jump on the ice-coated mounds of
brush several times before they would flush. Coming out while you were
poised unsteadily on the icy, springy brush they made difficult shooting
and I killed two, missed five, and started back pleased to have found a
covey close to the house and happy there were so many left to find on
another day.

At the house they said the boy had refused to let any one come into the
room.

“You can’t come in,” he said. “You mustn’t get what I have.”

I went up to him and found him in exactly the position I had left him,
white-faced, but with the tops of his cheeks flushed by the fever,
staring still, as he had stared, at the foot of the bed.

I took his temperature.

“What is it?”

“Something like a hundred,” I said. It was one hundred and two and four
tenths.

“It was a hundred and two,” he said.

“Who said so?”

“The doctor.”

“Your temperature is all right,” I said. “It’s nothing to worry about.”

“I don’t worry,” he said, “but I can’t keep from thinking.”

“Don’t think,” I said. “Just take it easy.”

“I’m taking it easy,” he said and looked straight ahead. He was
evidently holding tight onto himself about something.

“Take this with water.”

“Do you think it will do any good?”

“Of course it will.”

I sat down and opened the _Pirate_ book and commenced to read, but I
could see he was not following, so I stopped.

“About what time do you think I’m going to die?” he asked.

“What?”

“About how long will it be before I die?”

“You aren’t going to die. What’s the matter with you?”

“Oh, yes, I am. I heard him say a hundred and two.”

“People don’t die with a fever of one hundred and two. That’s a silly
way to talk.”

“I know they do. At school in France the boys told me you can’t live
with forty-four degrees. I’ve got a hundred and two.”

He had been waiting to die all day, ever since nine o’clock in the
morning.

“You poor Schatz,” I said. “Poor old Schatz. It’s like miles and
kilometers. You aren’t going to die. That’s a different thermometer. On
that thermometer thirty-seven is normal. On this kind it’s
ninety-eight.”

“Are you sure?”

“Absolutely,” I said. “It’s like miles and kilometers. You know, like
how many kilometers we make when we do seventy miles in the car?”

“Oh,” he said.

But his gaze at the foot of the bed relaxed slowly. The hold over
himself relaxed too, finally, and the next day it was very slack and he
cried very easily at little things that were of no importance.




                    A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE DEAD[1]


It has always seemed to me that the war has been omitted as a field for
the observations of the naturalist. We have charming and sound accounts
of the flora and fauna of Patagonia by the late W. H. Hudson, the
Reverend Gilbert White has written most interestingly of the Hoopoe on
its occasional and not at all common visits to Selborne, and Bishop
Stanley has given us a valuable, although popular, _Familiar History of
Birds_. Can we not hope to furnish the reader with a few rational and
interesting facts about the dead? I hope so.

When that persevering traveller, Mungo Park, was at one period of his
course fainting in the vast wilderness of an African desert, naked and
alone, considering his days as numbered and nothing appearing to remain
for him to do but to lie down and die, a small moss-flower of
extraordinary beauty caught his eye. “Though the whole plant,” says he,
“was no larger than one of my fingers, I could not contemplate the
delicate conformation of its roots, leaves and capsules without
admiration. Can that Being who planted, watered and brought to
perfection, in this obscure part of the world, a thing which appears of
so small importance, look with unconcern upon the situation and
suffering of creatures formed after his own image? Surely not.
Reflections like these would not allow me to despair; I started up and,
disregarding both hunger and fatigue, travelled forward, assured that
relief was at hand; and I was not disappointed.”

With a disposition to wonder and adore in like manner, as Bishop Stanley
says, can any branch of Natural History be studied without increasing
that faith, love and hope which we also, every one of us, need in our
journey through the wilderness of life? Let us therefore see what
inspiration we may derive from the dead.

In war the dead are usually the male of the human species although this
does not hold true with animals, and I have frequently seen dead mares
among the horses. An interesting aspect of war, too, is that it is only
there that the naturalist has an opportunity to observe the dead of
mules. In twenty years of observation in civil life I had never seen a
dead mule and had begun to entertain doubts as to whether these animals
were really mortal. On rare occasions I had seen what I took to be dead
mules, but on close approach these always proved to be living creatures
who seemed to be dead through their quality of complete repose. But in
war these animals succumb in much the same manner as the more common and
less hardy horse.

Most of those mules that I saw dead were along mountain roads or lying
at the foot of steep declivities whence they had been pushed to rid the
road of their encumbrance. They seemed a fitting enough sight in the
mountains where one was accustomed to their presence and looked less
incongruous there than they did later, at Smyrna, where the Greeks broke
the legs of all their baggage animals and pushed them off the quay into
the shallow water to drown. The numbers of broken-legged mules and
horses drowning in the shallow water called for a Goya to depict them.
Although, speaking literally, one can hardly say that they called for a
Goya since there has only been one Goya, long dead, and it is extremely
doubtful if these animals, were they able to call, would call for
pictorial representation of their plight but, more likely, would, if
they were articulate, call for some one to alleviate their condition.

Regarding the sex of the dead it is a fact that one becomes so
accustomed to the sight of all the dead being men that the sight of a
dead woman is quite shocking. I first saw inversion of the usual sex of
the dead after the explosion of a munition factory which had been
situated in the countryside near Milan, Italy. We drove to the scene of
the disaster in trucks along poplar-shaded roads, bordered with ditches
containing much minute animal life, which I could not clearly observe
because of the great clouds of dust raised by the trucks. Arriving where
the munition plant had been, some of us were put to patrolling about
those large stocks of munitions which for some reason had not exploded,
while others were put at extinguishing a fire which had gotten into the
grass of an adjacent field; which task being concluded, we were ordered
to search the immediate vicinity and surrounding fields for bodies. We
found and carried to an improvised mortuary a good number of these and,
I must admit, frankly, the shock it was to find that these dead were
women rather than men. In those days women had not yet commenced to wear
their hair cut short, as they did later for several years in Europe and
America, and the most disturbing thing, perhaps because it was the most
unaccustomed, was the presence and, even more disturbing, the occasional
absence of this long hair. I remember that after we had searched quite
thoroughly for the complete dead we collected fragments. Many of these
were detached from a heavy, barbed-wire fence which had surrounded the
position of the factory and from the still existent portions of which we
picked many of these detached bits which illustrated only too well the
tremendous energy of high explosive. Many fragments we found a
considerable distance away in the fields, they being carried farther by
their own weight.

On our return to Milan I recall one or two of us discussing the
occurrence and agreeing that the quality of unreality and the fact that
there were no wounded did much to rob the disaster of a horror which
might have been much greater. Also the fact that it had been so
immediate and that the dead were in consequence still as little
unpleasant as possible to carry and deal with made it quite removed from
the usual battlefield experience. The pleasant, though dusty, ride
through the beautiful Lombard countryside also was a compensation for
the unpleasantness of the duty and on our return, while we exchanged
impressions, we all agreed that it was indeed fortunate that the fire
which broke out just before we arrived had been brought under control as
rapidly as it had and before it had attained any of the seemingly huge
stocks of unexploded munitions. We agreed too that the picking up of the
fragments had been an extraordinary business; it being amazing that the
human body should be blown into pieces which exploded along no
anatomical lines, but rather divided as capriciously as the
fragmentation in the burst of a high explosive shell.

A naturalist, to obtain accuracy of observation, may confine himself in
his observations to one limited period and I will take first that
following the Austrian offensive of June, 1918, in Italy as one in which
the dead were present in their greatest numbers, a withdrawal having
been forced and an advance later made to recover the ground lost so that
the positions after the battle were the same as before except for the
presence of the dead. Until the dead are buried they change somewhat in
appearance each day. The color change in Caucasian races is from white
to yellow, to yellow-green, to black. If left long enough in the heat
the flesh comes to resemble coal-tar, especially where it has been
broken or torn, and it has quite a visible tarlike iridescence. The dead
grow larger each day until sometimes they become quite too big for their
uniforms, filling these until they seem blown tight enough to burst. The
individual members may increase in girth to an unbelievable extent and
faces fill as taut and globular as balloons. The surprising thing, next
to their progressive corpulence, is the amount of paper that is
scattered about the dead. Their ultimate position, before there is any
question of burial, depends on the location of the pockets in the
uniform. In the Austrian army these pockets were in the back of the
breeches and the dead, after a short time, all consequently lay on their
faces, the two hip pockets pulled out and, scattered around them in the
grass, all those papers their pockets had contained. The heat, the
flies, the indicative positions of the bodies in the grass, and the
amount of paper scattered are the impressions one retains. The smell of
a battlefield in hot weather one cannot recall. You can remember that
there was such a smell, but nothing ever happens to you to bring it
back. It is unlike the smell of a regiment, which may come to you
suddenly while riding in the street car and you will look across and see
the man who has brought it to you. But the other thing is gone as
completely as when you have been in love; you remember things that
happened, but the sensation cannot be recalled.

One wonders what that persevering traveller, Mungo Park, would have seen
on a battlefield in hot weather to restore his confidence. There were
always poppies in the wheat in the end of June and in July, and the
mulberry trees were in full leaf and one could see the heat waves rise
from the barrels of the guns where the sun struck them through the
screens of leaves; the earth was turned a bright yellow at the edge of
holes where mustard gas shells had been and the average broken house is
finer to see than one that has never been shelled, but few travellers
would take a good full breath of that early summer air and have any such
thoughts as Mungo Park about those formed in His own image.

The first thing that you found about the dead was that, hit badly
enough, they died like animals. Some quickly from a little wound you
would not think would kill a rabbit. They died from little wounds as
rabbits die sometimes from three or four small grains of shot that
hardly seem to break the skin. Others would die like cats; a skull
broken in and iron in the brain, they lie alive two days like cats that
crawl into the coal bin with a bullet in the brain and will not die
until you cut their heads off. Maybe cats do not die then, they say they
have nine lives, I do not know, but most men die like animals, not men.
I’d never seen a natural death, so called, and so I blamed it on the war
and like the persevering traveller, Mungo Park, knew that there was
something else, that always absent something else, and then I saw one.

The only natural death I’ve ever seen, outside of loss of blood, which
isn’t bad, was death from Spanish influenza. In this you drown in mucus,
choking, and how you know the patient’s dead is: at the end he turns to
be a little child again, though with his manly force, and fills the
sheets as full as any diaper with one vast, final, yellow cataract that
flows and dribbles on after he’s gone. So now I want to see the death of
any self-called Humanist[2] because a persevering traveller like Mungo
Park or me lives on and maybe yet will live to see the actual death of
members of this literary sect and watch the noble exits that they make.
In my musings as a naturalist it has occurred to me that while decorum
is an excellent thing some must be indecorous if the race is to be
carried on since the position prescribed for procreation is indecorous,
highly indecorous, and it occurred to me that perhaps that is what these
people are, or were: the children of decorous cohabitation. But
regardless of how they started I hope to see the finish of a few, and
speculate how worms will try that long preserved sterility; with their
quaint pamphlets gone to bust and into foot-notes all their lust.

While it is, perhaps, legitimate to deal with these self-designated
citizens in a natural history of the dead, even though the designation
may mean nothing by the time this work is published, yet it is unfair to
the other dead, who were not dead in their youth of choice, who owned no
magazines, many of whom had doubtless never even read a review, that one
has seen in the hot weather with a half-pint of maggots working where
their mouths have been. It was not always hot weather for the dead, much
of the time it was the rain that washed them clean when they lay in it
and made the earth soft when they were buried in it and sometimes then
kept on until the earth was mud and washed them out and you had to bury
them again. Or in the winter in the mountains you had to put them in the
snow and when the snow melted in the spring some one else had to bury
them. They had beautiful burying grounds in the mountains, war in the
mountains is the most beautiful of all war, and in one of them, at a
place called Pocol, they buried a general who was shot through the head
by a sniper. This is where those writers are mistaken who write books
called _Generals Die in Bed_, because this general died in a trench dug
in snow, high in the mountains, wearing an Alpini hat with an eagle
feather in it and a hole in front you couldn’t put your little finger in
and a hole in back you could put your fist in, if it were a small fist
and you wanted to put it there, and much blood in the snow. He was a
damned fine general, and so was General von Behr who commanded the
Bavarian Alpenkorps troops at the battle of Caporetto and was killed in
his staff car by the Italian rearguard as he drove into Udine ahead of
his troops, and the titles of all such books should be _Generals Usually
Die in Bed_, if we are to have any sort of accuracy in such things.

In the mountains too, sometimes, the snow fell on the dead outside the
dressing station on the side that was protected by the mountain from any
shelling. They carried them into a cave that had been dug into the
mountainside before the earth froze. It was in this cave that a man
whose head was broken as a flower-pot may be broken, although it was all
held together by membranes and a skillfully applied bandage now soaked
and hardened, with the structure of his brain disturbed by a piece of
broken steel in it, lay a day, a night, and a day. The stretcher-bearers
asked the doctor to go in and have a look at him. They saw him each time
they made a trip and even when they did not look at him they heard him
breathing. The doctor’s eyes were red and the lids swollen, almost shut
from tear gas. He looked at the man twice; once in daylight, once with a
flashlight. That too would have made a good etching for Goya, the visit
with the flashlight, I mean. After looking at him the second time the
doctor believed the stretcher-bearers when they said the soldier was
still alive.

“What do you want me to do about it?” he asked.

There was nothing they wanted done. But after a while they asked
permission to carry him out and lay him with the badly wounded.

“No. No. No!” said the doctor, who was busy. “What’s the matter? Are you
afraid of him?”

“We don’t like to hear him in there with the dead.”

“Don’t listen to him. If you take him out of there you will have to
carry him right back in.”

“We wouldn’t mind that, Captain Doctor.”

“No,” said the doctor. “No. Didn’t you hear me say no?”

“Why don’t you give him an overdose of morphine?” asked an artillery
officer who was waiting to have a wound in his arm dressed.

“Do you think that is the only use I have for morphine? Would you like
me to have to operate without morphine? You have a pistol, go out and
shoot him yourself.”

“He’s been shot already,” said the officer. “If some of you doctors were
shot you’d be different.”

“Thank you very much,” said the doctor waving a forceps in the air.
“Thank you a thousand times. What about these eyes?” He pointed the
forceps at them. “How would you like these?”

“Tear gas. We call it lucky if it’s tear gas.”

“Because you leave the line,” said the doctor. “Because you come running
here with your tear gas to be evacuated. You rub onions in your eyes.”

“You are beside yourself. I do not notice your insults. You are crazy.”

The stretcher-bearers came in.

“Captain Doctor,” one of them said.

“Get out of here!” said the doctor.

They went out.

“I will shoot the poor fellow,” the artillery officer said. “I am a
humane man. I will not let him suffer.”

“Shoot him then,” said the doctor. “Shoot him. Assume the
responsibility. I will make a report. Wounded shot by lieutenant of
artillery in first curing post. Shoot him. Go ahead shoot him.”

“You are not a human being.”

“My business is to care for the wounded, not to kill them. That is for
gentlemen of the artillery.”

“Why don’t you care for him then?”

“I have done so. I have done all that can be done.”

“Why don’t you send him down on the cable railway?”

“Who are you to ask me questions? Are you my superior officer? Are you
in command of this dressing post? Do me the courtesy to answer.”

The lieutenant of artillery said nothing. The others in the room were
all soldiers and there were no other officers present.

“Answer me,” said the doctor holding a needle up in his forceps. “Give
me a response.”

“F—— yourself,” said the artillery officer.

“So,” said the doctor. “So, you said that. All right. All right. We
shall see.”

The lieutenant of artillery stood up and walked toward him.

“F—— yourself,” he said. “F—— yourself. F—— your mother. F——
your sister. . . .”

The doctor tossed the saucer full of iodine in his face. As he came
toward him, blinded, the lieutenant fumbled for his pistol. The doctor
skipped quickly behind him, tripped him and, as he fell to the floor,
kicked him several times and picked up the pistol in his rubber gloves.
The lieutenant sat on the floor holding his good hand to his eyes.

“I’ll kill you!” he said. “I’ll kill you as soon as I can see.”

“I am the boss,” said the doctor. “All is forgiven since you know I am
the boss. You cannot kill me because I have your pistol. Sergeant!
Adjutant! Adjutant!”

“The adjutant is at the cable railway,” said the sergeant.

“Wipe out this officer’s eyes with alcohol and water. He has got iodine
in them. Bring me the basin to wash my hands. I will take this officer
next.”

“You won’t touch me.”

“Hold him tight. He is a little delirious.”

One of the stretcher-bearers came in.

“Captain Doctor.”

“What do you want?”

“The man in the dead-house——”

“Get out of here.”

“Is dead, Captain Doctor. I thought you would be glad to know.”

“See, my poor lieutenant? We dispute about nothing. In time of war we
dispute about nothing.”

“F—— you,” said the lieutenant of artillery. He still could not see.
“You’ve blinded me.”

“It is nothing,” said the doctor. “Your eyes will be all right. It is
nothing. A dispute about nothing.”

“Ayee! Ayee! Ayee!” suddenly screamed the lieutenant. “You have blinded
me! You have blinded me!”

“Hold him tight,” said the doctor. “He is in much pain. Hold him very
tight.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

[1] This story was published in a rather technical book called _Death in
the Afternoon_, which sold, or rather was offered for sale, at $3.50. It
is reprinted here in case any one not caring to spend that appreciable
sum for a rather technical book should care to read it.

[2] The reader’s indulgence is requested for this mention of an extinct
phenomenon. The reference, like all references to fashions, dates the
story but it is retained because of its mild historical interest and
because its omission would spoil the rhythm.




                            WINE OF WYOMING


It was a hot afternoon in Wyoming; the mountains were a long way away
and you could see snow on their tops, but they made no shadow, and in
the valley the grain-fields were yellow, the road was dusty with cars
passing, and all the small wooden houses at the edge of town were baking
in the sun. There was a tree made shade over Fontan’s back porch and I
sat there at a table and Madame Fontan brought up cold beer from the
cellar. A motor-car turned off the main road and came up the side road,
and stopped beside the house. Two men got out and came in through the
gate. I put the bottles under the table. Madame Fontan stood up.

“Where’s Sam?” one of the men asked at the screen door.

“He ain’t here. He’s at the mines.”

“You got some beer?”

“No. Ain’t got any beer. That’s a last bottle. All gone.”

“What’s he drinking?”

“That’s a last bottle. All gone.”

“Go on, give us some beer. You know me.”

“Ain’t got any beer. That’s a last bottle. All gone.”

“Come on, let’s go some place where we can get some real beer,” one of
them said, and they went out to the car. One of them walked unsteadily.
The motor-car jerked in starting, whirled on the road, and went on and
away.

“Put the beer on the table,” Madame Fontan said. “What’s the matter,
yes, all right. What’s the matter? Don’t drink off the floor.”

“I didn’t know who they were,” I said.

“They’re drunk,” she said. “That’s what makes the trouble. Then they go
somewhere else and say they got it here. Maybe they don’t even
remember.” She spoke French, but it was only French occasionally, and
there were many English words and some English constructions.

“Where’s Fontan?”

“Il fait de la vendange. Oh, my God, il est crazy pour le vin.”

“But you like the beer?”

“Oui, j’aime la bière, mais Fontan, il est crazy pour le vin.”

She was a plump old woman with a lovely ruddy complexion and white hair.
She was very clean and the house was very clean and neat. She came from
Lens.

“Where did you eat?”

“At the hotel.”

“Mangez ici. Il ne faut pas manger à l’hôtel ou au restaurant. Mangez
ici!”

“I don’t want to make you trouble. And besides they eat all right at the
hotel.”

“I never eat at the hotel. Maybe they eat all right there. Only once in
my life I ate at a restaurant in America. You know what they gave me?
They gave me pork that was raw!”

“Really?”

“I don’t lie to you. It was pork that wasn’t cooked! Et mon fils il est
marié avec une américaine, et tout le temps il a mangé les _beans_ en
_can_.”

“How long has he been married?”

“Oh, my God, I don’t know. His wife weighs two hundred twenty-five
pounds. She don’t work. She don’t cook. She gives him beans en can.”

“What does she do?”

“All the time she reads. Rien que des books. Tout le temps elle stay in
the bed and read books. Already she can’t have another baby. She’s too
fat. There ain’t any room.”

“What’s the matter with her?”

“She reads books all the time. He’s a good boy. He works hard. He worked
in the mines; now he works on a ranch. He never worked on a ranch
before, and the man that owns the ranch said to Fontan that he never saw
anybody work better on that ranch than that boy. Then he comes home and
she feeds him nothing.”

“Why doesn’t he get a divorce?”

“He ain’t got no money to get a divorce. Besides, il est _crazy_ pour
elle.”

“Is she beautiful?”

“He thinks _so_. When he brought her home I thought I would die. He’s
such a good boy and works hard all the time and never run around or make
any trouble. Then he goes away to work in the oil-fields and brings home
this Indienne that weighs right then one hundred eighty-five pounds.”

“Elle est Indienne?”

“She’s Indian all right. My God, yes. All the time she says sonofabitsh
goddam. She don’t work.”

“Where is she now?”

“Au show.”

“Where’s that?”

“_Au show. Moving_ pictures. All she does is read and go to the show.”

“Have you got any more beer?”

“My God, yes. Sure. You come and eat with us tonight.”

“All right. What should I bring?”

“Don’t bring anything. Nothing at all. Maybe Fontan will have some of
the wine.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

That night I had dinner at Fontan’s. We ate in the dining-room and there
was a clean tablecloth. We tried the new wine. It was very light and
clear and good, and still tasted of the grapes. At the table there were
Fontan and Madame and the little boy, André.

“What did you do today?” Fontan asked. He was an old man with small
mine-tired body, a drooping gray mustache, and bright eyes, and was from
the Centre near Saint-Etienne.

“I worked on my book.”

“Were your books all right?” asked Madame.

“He means he writes a book like a writer. Un roman,” Fontan explained.

“Pa, can I go to the show?” André asked.

“Sure,” said Fontan. André turned to me.

“How old do you think I am? Do you think I look fourteen years old?” He
was a thin little boy, but his face looked sixteen.

“Yes. You look fourteen.”

“When I go to the show I crouch down like this and try to look small.”
His voice was very high and breaking. “If I give them a quarter they
keep it all but if I give them only fifteen cents they let me in all
right.”

“I only give you fifteen cents, then,” said Fontan.

“No. Give me the whole quarter. I’ll get it changed on the way.”

“Il faut revenir tout de suite après le show,” Madame Fontan said.

“I come right back.” André went out the door. The night was cooling
outside. He left the door open and a cool breeze came in.

“Mangez!” said Madame Fontan. “You haven’t eaten anything.” I had eaten
two helpings of chicken and French fried potatoes, three ears of sweet
corn, some sliced cucumbers, and two helpings of salad.

“Perhaps he wants some kek,” Fontan said.

“I should have gotten some kek for him,” Madame Fontan said. “Mangez du
fromage. Mangez du crimcheez. Vous n’avez rien mangé. I ought have
gotten kek. Americans always eat kek.”

“Mais j’ai rudement bien mangé.”

“Mangez! Vous n’avez rien mangé. Eat it all. We don’t save anything. Eat
it all up.”

“Eat some more salad,” Fontan said.

“I’ll get some more beer,” Madame Fontan said. “If you work all day in a
book-factory you get hungry.”

“Elle ne comprend pas que vous êtes écrivain,” Fontan said. He was a
delicate old man who used the slang and knew the popular songs of his
period of military service in the end of the 1890’s. “He writes the
books himself,” he explained to Madame.

“You write the books yourself?” Madame asked.

“Sometimes.”

“Oh!” she said. “Oh! You write them yourself. Oh! Well, you get hungry
if you do that too. Mangez! Je vais chercher de la bière.”

We heard her walking on the stairs to the cellar. Fontan smiled at me.
He was very tolerant of people who had not his experience and worldly
knowledge.

When André came home from the show we were still sitting in the kitchen
and were talking about hunting.

“Labor _day_ we all went to Clear Creek,” Madame said. “Oh, my God, you
ought to have been there all right. We all went in the truck. Tout le
monde est allé dans le truck. Nous sommes partis le dimanche. C’est le
truck de Charley.”

“On a mangé, on a bu du vin, de la bière, et il y avait aussi un
français qui a apporté de l’absinthe,” Fontan said. “Un français de la
Californie!”

“My God, nous avons chanté. There’s a farmer comes to see what’s the
matter, and we give him something to drink, and he stayed with us
awhile. There was some Italians come too, and they want to stay with us
too. We sung a song about the Italians and they don’t understand it.
They didn’t know we didn’t want them, but we didn’t have nothing to do
with them, and after a while they went away.”

“How many fish did you catch?”

“Très peu. We went to fish a little while, but then we came back to sing
again. Nous avons chanté, vous savez.”

“In the night,” said Madame, “toutes les femmes dort dans le truck. Les
hommes à côté du feu. In the night I hear Fontan come to get some more
wine, and I tell him, Fontan, my God, leave some for tomorrow. Tomorrow
they won’t have anything to drink, and then they’ll be sorry.”

“Mais nous avons tout bu,” Fontan said. “Et le lendemain il ne reste
rien.”

“What did you do?”

“Nous avons pêché sérieusement.”

“Good trout, all right, too. My God, yes. All the same; half-pound one
ounce.”

“How big?”

“Half-pound one ounce. Just right to eat. All the same size; half-pound
one ounce.”

“How do you like America?” Fontan asked me.

“It’s my country, you see. So I like it, because it’s my country. Mais
on ne mange pas très bien. D’antan, oui. Mais maintenant, no.”

“No,” said Madame. “On ne mange pas bien.” She shook her head. “Et
aussi, il y a trop de Polack. Quand j’étais petite ma mère m’a dit,
‘vous mangez comme les Polacks.’ Je n’ai jamais compris ce que c’est
qu’un Polack. Mais maintenant en Amérique je comprends. Il y a trop de
Polack. Et, my God, ils sont sales, les Polacks.”

“It is fine for hunting and fishing,” I said.

“Oui. Ça, c’est le meilleur. La chasse et la pêche,” Fontan said.
“Qu’est-ce que vous avez comme fusil?”

“A twelve-gauge pump.”

“Il est bon, le pump,” Fontan nodded his head.

“Je veux aller à la chasse moi-même,” André said in his high, little
boy’s voice.

“Tu ne peux pas,” Fontan said. He turned to me.

“Ils sont des sauvages, les boys, vous savez. Ils sont des sauvages. Ils
veulent shooter les uns les autres.”

“Je veux aller tout seul,” André said, very shrill and excited.

“You can’t go,” Madame Fontan said. “You are too young.”

“Je veux aller tout seul,” André said shrilly. “Je veux shooter les rats
d’eau.”

“What are rats d’eau?” I asked.

“You don’t know them? Sure you know them. What they call the muskrats.”

André had brought the twenty-two-calibre rifle out from the cupboard and
was holding it in his hands under the light.

“Ils sont des sauvages,” Fontan explained. “Ils veulent shooter les uns
les autres.”

“Je veux aller tout seul,” André shrilled. He looked desperately along
the barrel of the gun. “Je veux shooter les rats d’eau. Je connais
beaucoup de rats d’eau.”

“Give me the gun,” Fontan said. He explained again to me. “They’re
savages. They would shoot one another.”

André held tight on to the gun.

“On peut looker. On ne fait pas de mal. On peut looker.”

“Il est crazy pour le shooting,” Madame Fontan said. “Mais il est trop
jeune.”

André put the twenty-two-calibre rifle back in the cupboard.

“When I’m bigger I’ll shoot the muskrats and the jack-rabbits too,” he
said in English. “One time I went out with papa and he shot a
jack-rabbit just a little bit and I shot it and hit it.”

“C’est vrai,” Fontan nodded. “Il a tué un jack.”

“But he hit it first,” André said. “I want to go all by myself and shoot
all by myself. Next year I can do it.” He went over in a corner and sat
down to read a book. I had picked it up when we came into the kitchen to
sit after supper. It was a library book—_Frank on a Gunboat_.

“Il aime les books,” Madame Fontan said. “But it’s better than to run
around at night with the other boys and steal things.”

“Books are all right,” Fontan said. “Monsieur il fait les books.”

“Yes, that’s so, all right. But too many books are bad,” Madame Fontan
said. “Ici, c’est une maladie, les books. C’est comme les churches. Ici
il y a trop de churches. En France il y a seulement les catholiques et
les protestants—et très peu de protestants. Mais ici rien que de
churches. Quand j’étais venu ici je disais, oh, my God, what are all the
churches?”

“C’est vrai,” Fontan said. “Il y a trop de churches.”

“The other day,” Madame Fontan said, “there was a little French girl
here with her mother, the cousin of Fontan, and she said to me, ‘En
Amérique il ne faut pas être catholique. It’s not good to be catholique.
The Americans don’t like you to be catholique. It’s like the dry law.’ I
said to her, ‘What you going to be? Heh? It’s better to be catholique if
you’re catholique.’ But she said, ‘No, it isn’t any good to be
catholique in America.’ But I think it’s better to be catholique if you
are. Ce n’est pas bon de changer sa religion. My God, no.”

“You go to the mass here?”

“No. I don’t go in America, only sometimes in a long while. Mais je
reste catholique. It’s no good to change the religion.”

“On dit que Schmidt est catholique,” Fontan said.

“On dit, mais on ne sait jamais,” Madame Fontan said. “I don’t think
Schmidt is catholique. There’s not many catholique in America.”

“We are catholique,” I said.

“Sure, but you live in France,” Madame Fontan said. “Je ne crois pas que
Schmidt est catholique. Did he ever live in France?”

“Les Polacks sont catholiques,” Fontan said.

“That’s true,” Madame Fontan said. “They go to church, then they fight
with knives all the way home and kill each other all day Sunday. But
they’re not real catholiques. They’re Polack catholiques.”

“All catholiques are the same,” Fontan said. “One catholique is like
another.”

“I don’t believe Schmidt is catholique,” Madame Fontan said. “That’s
awful funny if he’s catholique. Moi, je ne crois pas.”

“Il est catholique,” I said.

“Schmidt is catholique,” Madame Fontan mused. “I wouldn’t have believed
it. My God, il est catholique.”

“Marie va chercher de la bière,” Fontan said. “Monsieur a soif—moi
aussi.”

“Yes, all right,” Madame Fontan said from the next room. She went
downstairs and we heard the stairs creaking. André sat reading in the
corner. Fontan and I sat at the table, and he poured the beer from the
last bottle into our two glasses, leaving a little in the bottom.

“C’est un bon pays pour la chasse,” Fontan said. “J’aime beaucoup
shooter les canards.”

“Mais il y a très bonne chasse aussi en France,” I said.

“C’est vrai,” Fontan said. “Nous avons beaucoup de gibier là-bas.”

Madame Fontan came up the stairs with the beer bottles in her hands. “Il
est catholique,” she said. “My God, Schmidt est catholique.”

“You think he’ll be the President?” Fontan asked.

“No,” I said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The next afternoon I drove out to Fontan’s, through the shade of the
town, then along the dusty road, turning up the side road and leaving
the car beside the fence. It was another hot day. Madame Fontan came to
the back door. She looked like Mrs. Santa Claus, clean and rosy-faced
and white-haired, and waddling when she walked.

“My God, hello,” she said. “It’s hot, my God.” She went back into the
house to get some beer. I sat on the back porch and looked through the
screen and the leaves of the tree at the heat and, away off, the
mountains. There were furrowed brown mountains, and above them three
peaks and a glacier with snow that you could see through the trees. The
snow looked very white and pure and unreal. Madame Fontan came out and
put down the bottles on the table.

“What you see out there?”

“The snow.”

“C’est joli, la neige.”

“Have a glass, too.”

“All right.”

She sat down on a chair beside me. “Schmidt,” she said. “If he’s the
President, you think we get the wine and beer all right?”

“Sure,” I said. “Trust Schmidt.”

“Already we paid seven hundred fifty-five dollars in fines when they
arrested Fontan. Twice the police arrested us and once the governments.
All the money we made all the time Fontan worked in the mines and I did
washing. We paid it all. They put Fontan in jail. Il n’a jamais fait de
mal à personne.”

“He’s a good man,” I said. “It’s a crime.”

“We don’t charge too much money. The wine one dollar a litre. The beer
ten cents a bottle. We never sell the beer before it’s good. Lots of
places they sell the beer right away when they make it, and then it
gives everybody a headache. What’s the matter with that? They put Fontan
in jail and they take seven hundred fifty-five dollars.”

“It’s wicked,” I said. “Where is Fontan?”

“He stays with the wine. He has to watch it now to catch it just right,”
she smiled. She did not think about the money any more. “Vous savez, il
est crazy pour le vin. Last night he brought a little bit home with him,
what you drank, and a little bit of the new. The last new. It ain’t
ready yet, but he drank a little bit, and this morning he put a little
bit in his coffee. Dans son café, vous savez! Il est crazy pour le vin!
Il est comme ça. Son pays est comme ça. Where I live in the north they
don’t drink any wine. Everybody drinks beer. By where we lived there was
a big brewery right near us. When I was a little girl I didn’t like the
smell of the hops in the carts. Nor in the fields. Je n’aime pas les
houblons. No, my God, not a bit. The man that owns the brewery said to
me and my sister to go to the brewery and drink the beer, and then we’d
like the hops. That’s true. Then we liked them all right. He had them
give us the beer. We liked them all right then. But Fontan, il est crazy
pour le vin. One time he killed a jack-rabbit and he wanted me to cook
it with a sauce with wine, make a black sauce with wine and butter and
mushrooms and onion and everything in it, for the jack. My God, I make
the sauce all right, and he eat it all and said, ‘La sauce est meilleure
que le jack.’ Dans son pays c’est comme ça. Il y a beaucoup de gibier et
de vin. Moi, j’aime les pommes de terre, le saucisson, et la bière.
C’est bon, la bière. C’est très bon pour la santé.”

“It’s good,” I said. “It and wine too.”

“You’re like Fontan. But there was a thing here that I never saw. I
don’t think you’ve ever seen it either. There were Americans came here
and they put whiskey in the beer.”

“No,” I said.

“Oui. My God, yes, that’s true. Et aussi une femme qui a vomis sur la
table!”

“Comment?”

“C’est vrai. Elle a vomis sur la table. Et après elle a vomis dans ses
shoes. And afterward they come back and say they want to come again and
have another party the next Saturday, and I say no, my God, no! When
they came I locked the door.”

“They’re bad when they’re drunk.”

“In the winter-time when the boys go to the dance they come in the cars
and wait outside and say to Fontan, ‘Hey, Sam, sell us a bottle wine,’
or they buy the beer, and then they take the moonshine out of their
pockets in a bottle and pour it in the beer and drink it. My God, that’s
the first time I ever saw that in my life. They put whiskey in the beer.
My God, I don’t understand _that_!”

“They want to get sick, so they’ll know they’re drunk.”

“One time a fellow comes here came to me and said he wanted me to cook
them a big supper and they drink one two bottles of wine, and their
girls come too, and then they go to the dance. All right, I said. So I
made a big supper, and when they come already they drank a lot. Then
they put whiskey in the wine. My God, yes. I said to Fontan, ‘On va être
malade!’ ‘Oui,’ il dit. Then these girls were sick, nice girls too,
all-right girls. They were sick right at the table. Fontan tried to take
them by the arm and show them where they could be sick all right in the
cabinet, but the fellows said no, they were all right right there at the
table.”

Fontan had come in. “When they come again I locked the door. ‘No,’ I
said. ‘Not for hundred fifty dollars.’ My God, no.”

“There is a word for such people when they do like that, in French,”
Fontan said. He stood looking very old and tired from the heat.

“What?”

“Cochon,” he said delicately, hesitating to use such a strong word.
“They were like the cochon. C’est un mot très fort,” he apologized,
“mais vomir sur la table—” he shook his head sadly.

“Cochons,” I said. “That’s what they are—cochons. Salauds.”

The grossness of the words was distasteful to Fontan. He was glad to
speak of something else.

“Il y a des gens très gentils, très sensibles, qui viennent aussi,” he
said. “There are officers from the fort. Very nice men. Good fellas.
Everybody that was ever in France they want to come and drink wine. They
like wine all right.”

“There was one man,” Madame Fontan said, “and his wife never lets him
get out. So he tells her he’s tired, and goes to bed, and when she goes
to the show he comes straight down here, sometimes in his pyjamas just
with a coat over them. ‘Maria, some beer,’ he says, ‘for God’s sake.’ He
sits in his pyjamas and drinks the beer, and then he goes up to the fort
and gets back in bed before his wife comes home from the show.”

“C’est un original,” Fontan said, “mais vraiment gentil. He’s a nice
fella.”

“My God, yes, nice fella all right,” Madame Fontan said. “He’s always in
bed when his wife gets back from the show.”

“I have to go away tomorrow,” I said. “To the Crow Reservation. We go
there for the opening of the prairie-chicken season.”

“Yes? You come back here before you go away. You come back here all
right?”

“Absolutely.”

“Then the wine will be done,” Fontan said. “We’ll drink a bottle
together.”

“Three bottles,” Madame Fontan said.

“I’ll be back,” I said.

“We count on you,” Fontan said.

“Good night,” I said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

We got in early in the afternoon from the shooting-trip. We had been up
that morning since five o’clock. The day before we had had good
shooting, but that morning we had not seen a prairie-chicken. Riding in
the open car, we were very hot and we stopped to eat our lunch out of
the sun, under a tree beside the road. The sun was high and the patch of
shade was very small. We ate sandwiches and crackers with sandwich
filling on them, and were thirsty and tired, and glad when we finally
were out and on the main road back to town. We came up behind a
prairie-dog town and stopped the car to shoot at the prairie-dogs with
the pistol. We shot two, but then stopped, because the bullets that
missed glanced off the rocks and the dirt, and sung off across the
fields, and beyond the fields there were some trees along a watercourse,
with a house, and we did not want to get in trouble from stray bullets
going toward the house. So we drove on, and finally were on the road
coming down-hill toward the outlying houses of the town. Across the
plain we could see the mountains. They were blue that day, and the snow
on the high mountains shone like glass. The summer was ending, but the
new snow had not yet come to stay on the high mountains; there was only
the old sun-melted snow and the ice, and from a long way away it shone
very brightly.

We wanted something cool and some shade. We were sunburned and our lips
blistered from the sun and alkali dust. We turned up the side road to
Fontan’s, stopped the car outside the house, and went in. It was cool
inside the dining-room. Madame Fontan was alone.

“Only two bottles beer,” she said. “It’s all gone. The new is no good
yet.”

I gave her some birds. “That’s good,” she said. “All right. Thanks.
That’s good.” She went out to put the birds away where it was cooler.
When we finished the beer I stood up. “We have to go,” I said.

“You come back tonight all right? Fontan he’s going to have the wine.”

“We’ll come back before we go away.”

“You go away?”

“Yes. We have to leave in the morning.”

“That’s too bad you go away. You come tonight. Fontan will have the
wine. We’ll make a fête before you go.”

“We’ll come before we go.”

But that afternoon there were telegrams to send, the car to be gone
over,—a tire had been cut by a stone and needed vulcanizing,—and,
without the car, I walked into the town, doing things that had to be
done before we could go. When it was supper-time I was too tired to go
out. We did not want a foreign language. All we wanted was to go early
to bed.

As I lay in bed before I went to sleep, with all the things of the
summer piled around ready to be packed, the windows open and the air
coming in cool from the mountains, I thought it was a shame not to have
gone to Fontan’s—but in a little while I was asleep. The next day we
were busy all morning packing and ending the summer. We had lunch and
were ready to start by two o’clock.

“We must go and say good-by to the Fontans,” I said.

“Yes, we must.”

“I’m afraid they expected us last night.”

“I suppose we could have gone.”

“I wish we’d gone.”

We said good-by to the man at the desk at the hotel, and to Larry and
our other friends in the town, and then drove out to Fontan’s. Both
Monsieur and Madame were there. They were glad to see us. Fontan looked
old and tired.

“We thought you would come last night,” Madame Fontan said. “Fontan had
three bottles of wine. When you did not come he drank it all up.”

“We can only stay a minute,” I said. “We just came to say good-by. We
wanted to come last night. We intended to come, but we were too tired
after the trip.”

“Go get some wine,” Fontan said.

“There is no wine. You drank it all up.”

Fontan looked very upset.

“I’ll go get some,” he said. “I’ll just be gone a few minutes. I drank
it up last night. We had it for you.”

“I knew you were tired. ‘My God,’ I said, ‘they’re too tired all right
to come,’” Madame Fontan said. “Go get some wine, Fontan.”

“I’ll take you in the car,” I said.

“All right,” Fontan said. “That way we’ll go faster.”

We drove down the road in the motor-car and turned up a side road about
a mile away.

“You’ll like that wine,” Fontan said. “It’s come out well. You can drink
it for supper tonight.”

We stopped in front of a frame house. Fontan knocked on the door. There
was no answer. We went around to the back. The back door was locked too.
There were empty tin cans around the back door. We looked in the window.
There was nobody inside. The kitchen was dirty and sloppy, but all the
doors and windows were tight shut.

“That son of a bitch. Where is she gone out?” Fontan said. He was
desperate.

“I know where I can get a key,” he said. “You stay here.” I watched him
go down to the next house down the road, knock on the door, talk to the
woman who came out, and finally come back. He had a key. We tried it on
the front door and the back, but it wouldn’t work.

“That son of a bitch,” Fontan said. “She’s gone away somewhere.”

Looking through the window I could see where the wine was stored. Close
to the window you could smell the inside of the house. It smelled sweet
and sickish like an Indian house. Suddenly Fontan took a loose board and
commenced digging at the earth beside the back door.

“I can get in,” he said. “Son of a bitch, I can get in.”

There was a man in the back yard of the next house doing something to
one of the front wheels of an old Ford.

“You better not,” I said. “That man will see you. He’s watching.”

Fontan straightened up. “We’ll try the key once more,” he said. We tried
the key and it did not work. It turned half-way in either direction.

“We can’t get in,” I said. “We better go back.”

“I’ll dig up the back,” Fontan offered.

“No, I wouldn’t let you take the chance.”

“I’ll do it.”

“No,” I said. “That man would see. Then they would seize it.”

We went out to the car and drove back to Fontan’s, stopping on the way
to leave the key. Fontan did not say anything but swear in English. He
was incoherent and crushed. We went in the house.

“That son of a bitch!” he said. “We couldn’t get the wine. My own wine
that I made.”

All the happiness went from Madame Fontan’s face. Fontan sat down in a
corner with his head in his hands.

“We must go,” I said. “It doesn’t make any difference about the wine.
You drink to us when we’re gone.”

“Where did that crazy go?” Madame Fontan asked.

“I don’t know,” Fontan said. “I don’t know where she go. Now you go away
without any wine.”

“That’s all right,” I said.

“That’s no good,” Madame Fontan said. She shook her head.

“We have to go,” I said. “Good-by and good luck. Thank you for the fine
times.”

Fontan shook his head. He was disgraced. Madame Fontan looked sad.

“Don’t feel bad about the wine,” I said.

“He wanted you to drink his wine,” Madame Fontan said. “You can come
back next year?”

“No. Maybe the year after.”

“You see?” Fontan said to her.

“Good-by,” I said. “Don’t think about the wine. Drink some for us when
we’re gone.” Fontan shook his head. He did not smile. He knew when he
was ruined.

“That son of a bitch,” Fontan said to himself.

“Last night he had three bottles,” Madame Fontan said to comfort him. He
shook his head.

“Good-by,” he said.

Madame Fontan had tears in her eyes.

“Good-by,” she said. She felt badly for Fontan.

“Good-by,” we said. We all felt very badly. They stood in the doorway
and we got in, and I started the motor. We waved. They stood together
sadly on the porch. Fontan looked very old, and Madame Fontan looked
sad. She waved to us and Fontan went in the house. We turned up the
road.

“They felt so badly. Fontan felt terribly.”

“We ought to have gone last night.”

“Yes, we ought to have.”

We were through the town and out on the smooth road beyond, with the
stubble of grain-fields on each side and the mountains off to the right.
It looked like Spain, but it was Wyoming.

“I hope they have a lot of good luck.”

“They won’t,” I said, “and Schmidt won’t be President either.”

The cement road stopped. The road was gravelled now and we left the
plain and started up between two foot-hills; the road in a curve and
commencing to climb. The soil of the hills was red, the sage grew in
gray clumps, and as the road rose we could see across the hills and away
across the plain of the valley to the mountains. They were farther away
now and they looked more like Spain than ever. The road curved and
climbed again, and ahead there were some grouse dusting in the road.
They flew as we came toward them, their wings beating fast, then sailing
in long slants, and lit on the hillside below.

“They are so big and lovely. They’re bigger than European partridges.”

“It’s a fine country for la chasse, Fontan says.”

“And when the chasse is gone?”

“They’ll be dead then.”

“The boy won’t.”

“There’s nothing to prove he won’t be,” I said.

“We ought to have gone last night.”

“Oh, yes,” I said. “We ought to have gone.”




                  THE GAMBLER, THE NUN, AND THE RADIO


They brought them in around midnight and then, all night long, every one
along the corridor heard the Russian.

“Where is he shot?” Mr. Frazer asked the night nurse.

“In the thigh, I think.”

“What about the other one?”

“Oh, he’s going to die, I’m afraid.”

“Where is he shot?”

“Twice in the abdomen. They only found one of the bullets.”

They were both beet workers, a Mexican and a Russian, and they were
sitting drinking coffee in an all-night restaurant when some one came in
the door and started shooting at the Mexican. The Russian crawled under
a table and was hit, finally, by a stray shot fired at the Mexican as he
lay on the floor with two bullets in his abdomen. That was what the
paper said.

The Mexican told the police he had no idea who shot him. He believed it
to be an accident.

“An accident that he fired eight shots at you and hit you twice, there?”

“Si, señor,” said the Mexican, who was named Cayetano Ruiz.

“An accident that he hit me at all, the cabron,” he said to the
interpreter.

“What does he say?” asked the detective sergeant, looking across the bed
at the interpreter.

“He says it was an accident.”

“Tell him to tell the truth, that he is going to die,” the detective
said.

“Na,” said Cayetano. “But tell him that I feel very sick and would
prefer not to talk so much.”

“He says that he is telling the truth,” the interpreter said. Then,
speaking confidently, to the detective, “He don’t know who shot him.
They shot him in the back.”

“Yes,” said the detective. “I understand that, but why did the bullets
all go in the front?”

“Maybe he is spinning around,” said the interpreter.

“Listen,” said the detective, shaking his finger almost at Cayetano’s
nose, which projected, waxen yellow, from his dead-man’s face in which
his eyes were alive as a hawk’s. “I don’t give a damn who shot you, but
I’ve got to clear this thing up. Don’t you want the man who shot you to
be punished? Tell him that,” he said to the interpreter.

“He says to tell who shot you.”

“Mandarlo al carajo,” said Cayetano, who was very tired.

“He says he never saw the fellow at all,” the interpreter said. “I tell
you straight they shot him in the back.”

“Ask him who shot the Russian.”

“Poor Russian,” said Cayetano. “He was on the floor with his head
enveloped in his arms. He started to give cries when they shoot him and
he is giving cries ever since. Poor Russian.”

“He says some fellow that he doesn’t know. Maybe the same fellow that
shot him.”

“Listen,” the detective said. “This isn’t Chicago. You’re not a
gangster. You don’t have to act like a moving picture. It’s all right to
tell who shot you. Anybody would tell who shot them. That’s all right to
do. Suppose you don’t tell who he is and he shoots somebody else.
Suppose he shoots a woman or a child. You can’t let him get away with
that. You tell him,” he said to Mr. Frazer. “I don’t trust that damn
interpreter.”

“I am very reliable,” the interpreter said. Cayetano looked at Mr.
Frazer.

“Listen, amigo,” said Mr. Frazer. “The policeman says that we are not in
Chicago but in Hailey, Montana. You are not a bandit and this has
nothing to do with the cinema.”

“I believe him,” said Cayetano softly. “Ya lo creo.”

“One can, with honor, denounce one’s assailant. Every one does it here,
he says. He says what happens if after shooting you, this man shoots a
woman or a child?”

“I am not married,” Cayetano said.

“He says any woman, any child.”

“The man is not crazy,” Cayetano said.

“He says you should denounce him,” Mr. Frazer finished.

“Thank you,” Cayetano said. “You are of the great translators. I speak
English, but badly. I understand it all right. How did you break your
leg?”

“A fall off a horse.”

“What bad luck. I am very sorry. Does it hurt much?”

“Not now. At first, yes.”

“Listen, amigo,” Cayetano began, “I am very weak. You will pardon me.
Also I have much pain; enough pain. It is very possible that I die.
Please get this policeman out of here because I am very tired.” He made
as though to roll to one side; then held himself still.

“I told him everything exactly as you said and he said to tell you,
truly, that he doesn’t know who shot him and that he is very weak and
wishes you would question him later on,” Mr. Frazer said.

“He’ll probably be dead later on.”

“That’s quite possible.”

“That’s why I want to question him now.”

“Somebody shot him in the back, I tell you,” the interpreter said.

“Oh, for Chrisake,” the detective sergeant said, and put his notebook in
his pocket.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Outside in the corridor the detective sergeant stood with the
interpreter beside Mr. Frazer’s wheeled chair.

“I suppose you think somebody shot him in the back too?”

“Yes,” Frazer said. “Somebody shot him in the back. What’s it to you?”

“Don’t get sore,” the sergeant said. “I wish I could talk spik.”

“Why don’t you learn?”

“You don’t have to get sore. I don’t get any fun out of asking that spik
questions. If I could talk spik it would be different.”

“You don’t need to talk Spanish,” the interpreter said. “I am a very
reliable interpreter.”

“Oh, for Chrisake,” the sergeant said. “Well, so long. I’ll come up and
see you.”

“Thanks. I’m always in.”

“I guess you are all right. That was bad luck all right. Plenty bad
luck.”

“It’s coming along good now since he spliced the bone.”

“Yes, but it’s a long time. A long, long time.”

“Don’t let anybody shoot you in the back.”

“That’s right,” he said. “That’s right. Well, I’m glad you’re not sore.”

“So long,” said Mr. Frazer.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Mr. Frazer did not see Cayetano again for a long time, but each morning
Sister Cecilia brought news of him. He was so uncomplaining she said and
he was very bad now. He had peritonitis and they thought he could not
live. Poor Cayetano, she said. He had such beautiful hands and such a
fine face and he never complains. The odor, now, was really terrific. He
would point toward his nose with one finger and smile and shake his
head, she said. He felt badly about the odor. It embarrassed him, Sister
Cecilia said. Oh, he was such a fine patient. He always smiled. He
wouldn’t go to confession to Father but he promised to say his prayers,
and not a Mexican had been to see him since he had been brought in. The
Russian was going out at the end of the week. I could never feel
anything about the Russian, Sister Cecilia said. Poor fellow, he
suffered too. It was a greased bullet and dirty and the wound infected,
but he made so much noise and then I always like the bad ones. That
Cayetano, he’s a bad one. Oh, he must really be a bad one, a thoroughly
bad one, he’s so fine and delicately made and he’s never done any work
with his hands. He’s not a beet worker. I know he’s not a beet worker.
His hands are as smooth and not a callous on them. I know he’s a bad one
of some sort. I’m going down and pray for him now. Poor Cayetano, he’s
having a dreadful time and he doesn’t make a sound. What did they have
to shoot him for? Oh, that poor Cayetano! I’m going right down and pray
for him.

She went right down and prayed for him.

                 *        *        *        *        *

In that hospital a radio did not work very well until it was dusk. They
said it was because there was so much ore in the ground or something
about the mountains, but anyway it did not work well at all until it
began to get dark outside; but all night it worked beautifully and when
one station stopped you could go farther west and pick up another. The
last one that you could get was Seattle, Washington, and due to the
difference in time, when they signed off at four o’clock in the morning
it was five o’clock in the morning in the hospital; and at six o’clock
you could get the morning revellers in Minneapolis. That was on account
of the difference in time, too, and Mr. Frazer used to like to think of
the morning revellers arriving at the studio and picture how they would
look getting off a street car before daylight in the morning carrying
their instruments. Maybe that was wrong and they kept their instruments
at the place they revelled, but he always pictured them with their
instruments. He had never been in Minneapolis and believed he probably
would never go there, but he knew what it looked like that early in the
morning.

Out of the window of the hospital you could see a field with tumbleweed
coming out of the snow, and a bare clay butte. One morning the doctor
wanted to show Mr. Frazer two pheasants that were out there in the snow,
and pulling the bed toward the window, the reading light fell off the
iron bedstead and hit Mr. Frazer on the head. This does not sound so
funny now but it was very funny then. Every one was looking out the
window, and the doctor, who was a most excellent doctor, was pointing at
the pheasants and pulling the bed toward the window, and then, just as
in a comic section, Mr. Frazer was knocked out by the leaded base of the
lamp hitting the top of his head. It seemed the antithesis of healing or
whatever people were in the hospital for, and every one thought it was
very funny, as a joke on Mr. Frazer and on the doctor. Everything is
much simpler in a hospital, including the jokes.

From the other window, if the bed was turned, you could see the town,
with a little smoke above it, and the Dawson mountains looking like real
mountains with the winter snow on them. Those were the two views since
the wheeled chair had proved to be premature. It is really best to be in
bed if you are in a hospital; since two views, with time to observe
them, from a room the temperature of which you control, are much better
than any number of views seen for a few minutes from hot, empty rooms
that are waiting for some one else, or just abandoned, which you are
wheeled in and out of. If you stay long enough in a room the view,
whatever it is, acquires a great value and becomes very important and
you would not change it, not even by a different angle. Just as, with
the radio, there are certain things that you become fond of, and you
welcome them and resent the new things. The best tunes they had that
winter were “Sing Something Simple,” “Singsong Girl,” and “Little White
Lies.” No other tunes were as satisfactory, Mr. Frazer felt. “Betty
Co-ed” was a good tune too, but the parody of the words which came
unavoidably into Mr. Frazer’s mind, grew so steadily and increasingly
obscene that there being no one to appreciate it, he finally abandoned
it and let the song go back to football.

About nine o’clock in the morning they would start using the X-ray
machine, and then the radio, which, by then, was only getting Hailey,
became useless. Many people in Hailey who owned radios protested about
the hospital’s X-ray machine which ruined their morning reception, but
there was never any action taken, although many felt it was a shame the
hospital could not use their machine at a time when people were not
using their radios.

                 *        *        *        *        *

About the time when it became necessary to turn off the radio Sister
Cecilia came in.

“How’s Cayetano, Sister Cecilia?” Mr. Frazer asked.

“Oh, he’s very bad.”

“Is he out of his head?”

“No, but I’m afraid he’s going to die.”

“How are you?”

“I’m very worried about him, and do you know that absolutely no one has
come to see him? He could die just like a dog for all those Mexicans
care. They’re really dreadful.”

“Do you want to come up and hear the game this afternoon?”

“Oh, no,” she said. “I’d be too excited. I’ll be in the chapel praying.”

“We ought to be able to hear it pretty well,” Mr. Frazer said. “They’re
playing out on the coast and the difference in time will bring it late
enough so we can get it all right.”

“Oh, no. I couldn’t do it. The world series nearly finished me. When the
Athletics were at bat I was praying right out loud: ‘Oh, Lord, direct
their batting eyes! Oh, Lord, may he hit one! Oh, Lord, may he hit
safely!’ Then when they filled the bases in the third game, you
remember, it was too much for me. ‘Oh, Lord, may he hit it out of the
lot! Oh, Lord, may he drive it clean over the fence!’ Then you know when
the Cardinals would come to bat it was simply dreadful. ‘Oh, Lord, may
they not see it! Oh, Lord, don’t let them even catch a glimpse of it!
Oh, Lord, may they fan!’ And this game is even worse. It’s Notre Dame.
Our Lady. No, I’ll be in the chapel. For Our Lady. They’re playing for
Our Lady. I wish you’d write something sometime for Our Lady. You could
do it. You know you could do it, Mr. Frazer.”

“I don’t know anything about her that I could write. It’s mostly been
written already,” Mr. Frazer said. “You wouldn’t like the way I write.
She wouldn’t care for it either.”

“You’ll write about her sometime,” Sister said. “I know you will. You
must write about Our Lady.”

“You’d better come up and hear the game.”

“It would be too much for me. No, I’ll be in the chapel doing what I
can.”

That afternoon they had been playing about five minutes when a
probationer came into the room and said, “Sister Cecilia wants to know
how the game is going?”

“Tell her they have a touchdown already.”

In a little while the probationer came into the room again.

“Tell her they’re playing them off their feet,” Mr. Frazer said.

A little later he rang the bell for the nurse who was on floor duty.
“Would you mind going down to the chapel or sending word down to Sister
Cecilia that Notre Dame has them fourteen to nothing at the end of the
first quarter and that it’s all right. She can stop praying.”

In a few minutes Sister Cecilia came into the room. She was very
excited. “What does fourteen to nothing mean? I don’t know anything
about this game. That’s a nice safe lead in baseball. But I don’t know
anything about football. It may not mean a thing. I’m going right back
down to the chapel and pray until it’s finished.”

“They have them beaten,” Frazer said. “I promise you. Stay and listen
with me.”

“No. No. No. No. No. No. No,” she said. “I’m going right down to the
chapel to pray.”

Mr. Frazer sent down word whenever Notre Dame scored, and finally, when
it had been dark a long time, the final result.

“How’s Sister Cecilia?”

“They’re all at chapel,” she said.

The next morning Sister Cecilia came in. She was very pleased and
confident.

“I knew they couldn’t beat Our Lady,” she said. “They couldn’t.
Cayetano’s better too. He’s much better. He’s going to have visitors. He
can’t see them yet, but they are going to come and that will make him
feel better and know he’s not forgotten by his own people. I went down
and saw that O’Brien boy at Police Headquarters and told him that he’s
got to send some Mexicans up to see poor Cayetano. He’s going to send
some this afternoon. Then that poor man will feel better. It’s wicked
the way no one has come to see him.”

That afternoon about five o’clock three Mexicans came into the room.

“Can one?” asked the biggest one, who had very thick lips and was quite
fat.

“Why not?” Mr. Frazer answered. “Sit down, gentlemen. Will you take
something?”

“Many thanks,” said the big one.

“Thanks,” said the darkest and smallest one.

“Thanks, no,” said the thin one. “It mounts to my head.” He tapped his
head.

The nurse brought some glasses. “Please give them the bottle,” Frazer
said. “It is from Red Lodge,” he explained.

“That of Red Lodge is the best,” said the big one. “Much better than
that of Big Timber.”

“Clearly,” said the smallest one, “and costs more too.”

“In Red Lodge it is of all prices,” said the big one.

“How many tubes has the radio?” asked the one who did not drink.

“Seven.”

“Very beautiful,” he said. “What does it cost?”

“I don’t know,” Mr. Frazer said. “It is rented.”

“You gentlemen are friends of Cayetano?”

“No,” said the big one. “We are friends of he who wounded him.”

“We were sent here by the police,” the smallest one said.

“We have a little place,” the big one said. “He and I,” indicating the
one who did not drink. “He has a little place too,” indicating the
small, dark one. “The police tell us we have to come—so we come.”

“I am very happy you have come.”

“Equally,” said the big one.

“Will you have another little cup?”

“Why not?” said the big one.

“With your permission,” said the smallest one.

“Not me,” said the thin one. “It mounts to my head.”

“It is very good,” said the smallest one.

“Why not try some,” Mr. Frazer asked the thin one. “Let a little mount
to your head.”

“Afterwards comes the headache,” said the thin one.

“Could you not send friends of Cayetano to see him?” Frazer asked.

“He has no friends.”

“Every man has friends.”

“This one, no.”

“What does he do?”

“He is a card-player.”

“Is he good?”

“I believe it.”

“From me,” said the smallest one, “he won one hundred and eighty
dollars. Now there is no longer one hundred and eighty dollars in the
world.”

“From me,” said the thin one, “he won two hundred and eleven dollars.
Fix yourself on that figure.”

“I never played with him,” said the fat one.

“He must be very rich,” Mr. Frazer suggested.

“He is poorer than we,” said the little Mexican.

“He has no more than the shirt on his back.”

“And that shirt is of little value now,” Mr. Frazer said. “Perforated as
it is.”

“Clearly.”

“The one who wounded him was a card-player?”

“No, a beet worker. He has had to leave town.”

“Fix yourself on this,” said the smallest one. “He was the best guitar
player ever in this town. The finest.”

“What a shame.”

“I believe it,” said the biggest one. “How he could touch the guitar.”

“There are no good guitar players left?”

“Not the shadow of a guitar player.”

“There is an accordion player who is worth something,” the thin man
said.

“There are a few who touch various instruments,” the big one said. “You
like music?”

“How would I not?”

“We will come one night with music? You think the sister would allow it?
She seems very amiable.”

“I am sure she would permit it when Cayetano is able to hear it.”

“Is she a little crazy?” asked the thin one.

“Who?”

“That sister?”

“No,” Mr. Frazer said. “She is a fine woman of great intelligence and
sympathy.”

“I distrust all priests, monks, and sisters,” said the thin one.

“He had bad experiences when a boy,” the smallest one said.

“I was acolyte,” the thin one said proudly. “Now I believe in nothing.
Neither do I go to mass.”

“Why? Does it mount to your head?”

“No,” said the thin one. “It is alcohol that mounts to my head. Religion
is the opium of the poor.”

“I thought mariajuana was the opium of the poor,” Frazer said.

“Did you ever smoke opium?” the big one asked.

“No.”

“Nor I,” he said. “It seems it is very bad. One commences and cannot
stop. It is a vice.”

“Like religion,” said the thin one.

“This one,” said the smallest Mexican, “is very strong against
religion.”

“It is necessary to be very strong against something,” Mr. Frazer said
politely.

“I respect those who have faith even though they are ignorant,” the thin
one said.

“Good,” said Mr. Frazer.

“What can we bring you?” asked the big Mexican. “Do you lack for
anything?”

“I would be glad to buy some beer if there is good beer.”

“We will bring beer.”

“Another copita before you go?”

“It is very good.”

“We are robbing you.”

“I can’t take it. It goes to my head. Then I have a bad headache and
sick at the stomach.”

“Good-by, gentlemen.”

“Good-by and thanks.”

They went out and there was supper and then the radio, turned to be as
quiet as possible and still be heard, and the stations finally signing
off in this order: Denver, Salt Lake City, Los Angeles, and Seattle. Mr.
Frazer received no picture of Denver from the radio. He could see Denver
from the _Denver Post_, and correct the picture from _The Rocky Mountain
News_. Nor did he ever have any feel of Salt Lake City or Los Angeles
from what he heard from those places. All he felt about Salt Lake City
was that it was clean, but dull, and there were too many ballrooms
mentioned in too many big hotels for him to see Los Angeles. He could
not feel it for the ballrooms. But Seattle he came to know very well,
the taxicab company with the big white cabs (each cab equipped with
radio itself) he rode in every night out to the roadhouse on the
Canadian side where he followed the course of parties by the musical
selections they phoned for. He lived in Seattle from two o’clock on,
each night, hearing the pieces that all the different people asked for,
and it was as real as Minneapolis, where the revellers left their beds
each morning to make that trip down to the studio. Mr. Frazer grew very
fond of Seattle, Washington.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The Mexicans came and brought beer but it was not good beer. Mr. Frazer
saw them but he did not feel like talking, and when they went he knew
they would not come again. His nerves had become tricky and he disliked
seeing people while he was in this condition. His nerves went bad at the
end of five weeks, and while he was pleased they lasted that long yet he
resented being forced to make the same experiment when he already knew
the answer. Mr. Frazer had been through this all before. The only thing
which was new to him was the radio. He played it all night long, turned
so low he could barely hear it, and he was learning to listen to it
without thinking.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Sister Cecilia came into the room about ten o’clock in the morning on
that day and brought the mail. She was very handsome, and Mr. Frazer
liked to see her and to hear her talk, but the mail, supposedly coming
from a different world, was more important. However, there was nothing
in the mail of any interest.

“You look _so_ much better,” she said. “You’ll be leaving us soon.”

“Yes,” Mr. Frazer said. “You look very happy this morning.”

“Oh, I am. This morning I feel as though I might be a saint.”

Mr. Frazer was a little taken aback at this.

“Yes,” Sister Cecila went on. “That’s what I want to be. A saint. Ever
since I was a little girl I’ve wanted to be a saint. When I was a girl I
thought if I renounced the world and went into the convent I would be a
saint. That was what I wanted to be and that was what I thought I had to
do to be one. I expected I would be a saint. I was absolutely sure I
would be one. For just a moment I thought I was one. I was so happy and
it seemed so simple and easy. When I awoke in the morning I expected I
would be a saint, but I wasn’t. I’ve never become one. I want so to be
one. All I want is to be a saint. That is all I’ve ever wanted. And this
morning I feel as though I might be one. Oh, I hope I will get to be
one.”

“You’ll be one. Everybody gets what they want. That’s what they always
tell me.”

“I don’t know now. When I was a girl it seemed so simple. I knew I would
be a saint. Only I believed it took time when I found it did not happen
suddenly. Now it seems almost impossible.”

“I’d say you had a good chance.”

“Do you really think so? No, I don’t want just to be encouraged. Don’t
just encourage me. I want to be a saint. I want so to be a saint.”

“Of course you’ll be a saint,” Mr. Frazer said.

“No, probably I won’t be. But, oh, if I could only be a saint! I’d be
perfectly happy.”

“You’re three to one to be a saint.”

“No, don’t encourage me. But, oh, if I could only be a saint! If I could
only be a saint!”

“How’s your friend Cayetano?”

“He’s going to get well but he’s paralyzed. One of the bullets hit the
big nerve that goes down through his thigh and that leg is paralyzed.
They only found it out when he got well enough so that he could move.”

“Maybe the nerve will regenerate.”

“I’m praying that it will,” Sister Cecilia said. “You ought to see him.”

“I don’t feel like seeing anybody.”

“You know you’d like to see him. They could wheel him in here.”

“All right.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

They wheeled him in, thin, his skin transparent, his hair black and
needing to be cut, his eyes very laughing, his teeth bad when he smiled.

“Hola, amigo! Que tal?”

“As you see,” said Mr. Frazer. “And thou?”

“Alive and with the leg paralyzed.”

“Bad,” Mr. Frazer said. “But the nerve can regenerate and be as good as
new.”

“So they tell me.”

“What about the pain?”

“Not now. For a while I was crazy with it in the belly. I thought the
pain alone would kill me.”

Sister Cecilia was observing them happily.

“She tells me you never made a sound,” Mr. Frazer said.

“So many people in the ward,” the Mexican said deprecatingly. “What
class of pain do you have?”

“Big enough. Clearly not as bad as yours. When the nurse goes out I cry
an hour, two hours. It rests me. My nerves are bad now.”

“You have the radio. If I had a private room and a radio I would be
crying and yelling all night long.”

“I doubt it.”

“Hombre, si. It’s very healthy. But you cannot do it with so many
people.”

“At least,” Mr. Frazer said, “the hands are still good. They tell me you
make your living with the hands.”

“And the head,” he said, tapping his forehead. “But the head isn’t worth
as much.”

“Three of your countrymen were here.”

“Sent by the police to see me.”

“They brought some beer.”

“It probably was bad.”

“It was bad.”

“Tonight, sent by the police, they come to serenade me.” He laughed,
then tapped his stomach. “I cannot laugh yet. As musicians they are
fatal.”

“And the one who shot you?”

“Another fool. I won thirty-eight dollars from him at cards. That is not
to kill about.”

“The three told me you win much money.”

“And am poorer than the birds.”

“How?”

“I am a poor idealist. I am the victim of illusions.” He laughed, then
grinned and tapped his stomach. “I am a professional gambler but I like
to gamble. To really gamble. Little gambling is all crooked. For real
gambling you need luck. I have no luck.”

“Never?”

“Never. I am completely without luck. Look, this cabron who shoots me
just now. Can he shoot? No. The first shot he fires into nothing. The
second is intercepted by a poor Russian. That would seem to be luck.
What happens? He shoots me twice in the belly. He is a lucky man. I have
no luck. He could not hit a horse if he were holding the stirrup. All
luck.”

“I thought he shot you first and the Russian after.”

“No, the Russian first, me after. The paper was mistaken.”

“Why didn’t you shoot him?”

“I never carry a gun. With my luck, if I carried a gun I would be hanged
ten times a year. I am a cheap card player, only that.” He stopped, then
continued. “When I make a sum of money I gamble and when I gamble I
lose. I have passed at dice for three thousand dollars and crapped out
for the six. With good dice. More than once.”

“Why continue?”

“If I live long enough the luck will change. I have bad luck now for
fifteen years. If I ever get any good luck I will be rich.” He grinned.
“I am a good gambler, really I would enjoy being rich.”

“Do you have bad luck with all games?”

“With everything and with women.” He smiled again, showing his bad
teeth.

“Truly?”

“Truly.”

“And what is there to do?”

“Continue, slowly, and wait for luck to change.”

“But with women?”

“No gambler has luck with women. He is too concentrated. He works
nights. When he should be with the woman. No man who works nights can
hold a woman if the woman is worth anything.”

“You are a philosopher.”

“No, hombre. A gambler of the small towns. One small town, then another,
another, then a big town, then start over again.”

“Then shot in the belly.”

“The first time,” he said. “That has only happened once.”

“I tire you talking?” Mr. Frazer suggested.

“No,” he said. “I must tire you.”

“And the leg?”

“I have no great use for the leg. I am all right with the leg or not. I
will be able to circulate.”

“I wish you luck, truly, and with all my heart,” Mr. Frazer said.

“Equally,” he said. “And that the pain stops.”

“It will not last, certainly. It is passing. It is of no importance.”

“That it passes quickly.”

“Equally.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

That night the Mexicans played the accordion and other instruments in
the ward and it was cheerful and the noise of the inhalations and
exhalations of the accordion, and of the bells, the traps, and the drum
came down the corridor. In that ward there was a rodeo rider who had
come out of the chutes on Midnight on a hot dusty afternoon with a big
crowd watching, and now, with a broken back, was going to learn to work
in leather and to cane chairs when he got well enough to leave the
hospital. There was a carpenter who had fallen with a scaffolding and
broken both ankles and both wrists. He had lit like a cat but without a
cat’s resiliency. They could fix him up so that he could work again but
it would take a long time. There was a boy from a farm, about sixteen
years old, with a broken leg that had been badly set and was to be
rebroken. There was Cayetano Ruiz, a small-town gambler with a paralyzed
leg. Down the corridor Mr. Frazer could hear them all laughing and merry
with the music made by the Mexicans who had been sent by the police. The
Mexicans were having a good time. They came in, very excited, to see Mr.
Frazer and wanted to know if there was anything he wanted them to play,
and they came twice more to play at night of their own accord.

The last time they played Mr. Frazer lay in his room with the door open
and listened to the noisy, bad music and could not keep from thinking.
When they wanted to know what he wished played, he asked for the
Cucaracha, which has the sinister lightness and deftness of so many of
the tunes men have gone to die to. They played noisily and with emotion.
The tune was better than most of such tunes, to Mr. Frazer’s mind, but
the effect was all the same.

In spite of this introduction of emotion, Mr. Frazer went on thinking.
Usually he avoided thinking all he could, except when he was writing,
but now he was thinking about those who were playing and what the little
one had said.

Religion is the opium of the people. He believed that, that dyspeptic
little joint-keeper. Yes, and music is the opium of the people. Old
mount-to-the-head hadn’t thought of that. And now economics is the opium
of the people; along with patriotism the opium of the people in Italy
and Germany. What about sexual intercourse; was that an opium of the
people? Of some of the people. Of some of the best of the people. But
drink was a sovereign opium of the people, oh, an excellent opium.
Although some prefer the radio, another opium of the people, a cheap one
he had just been using. Along with these went gambling, an opium of the
people if there ever was one, one of the oldest. Ambition was another,
an opium of the people, along with a belief in any new form of
government. What you wanted was the minimum of government, always less
government. Liberty, what we believed in, now the name of a MacFadden
publication. We believed in that although they had not found a new name
for it yet. But what was the real one? What was the real, the actual,
opium of the people? He knew it very well. It was gone just a little way
around the corner in that well-lighted part of his mind that was there
after two or more drinks in the evening; that he knew was there (it was
not really there of course). What was it? He knew very well. What was
it? Of course; bread was the opium of the people. Would he remember that
and would it make sense in the daylight? Bread is the opium of the
people.

“Listen,” Mr. Frazer said to the nurse when she came. “Get that little
thin Mexican in here, will you, please?”

“How did you like it?” the Mexican said at the door.

“Very much.”

“It is a historic tune,” the Mexican said. “It is the tune of the real
revolution.”

“Listen,” said Mr. Frazer. “Why should the people be operated on without
an anæsthetic?”

“I do not understand.”

“Why are not all the opiums of the people, good? What do you want to do
with the people?”

“They should be rescued from ignorance.”

“Don’t talk nonsense. Education is an opium of the people. You ought to
know that. You’ve had a little.”

“You do not believe in education?”

“No,” said Mr. Frazer. “In knowledge, yes.”

“I do not follow you.”

“Many times I do not follow myself with pleasure.”

“You want to hear the Cucaracha another time?” asked the Mexican
worriedly.

“Yes,” said Mr. Frazer. “Play the Cucaracha another time. It’s better
than the radio.”

Revolution, Mr. Frazer thought, is no opium. Revolution is a catharsis;
an ecstasy which can only be prolonged by tyranny. The opiums are for
before and for after. He was thinking well, a little too well.

They would go now in a little while, he thought, and they would take the
Cucaracha with them. Then he would have a little spot of the giant
killer and play the radio, you could play the radio so that you could
hardly hear it.




                            FATHERS AND SONS


There had been a sign to detour in the centre of the main street of this
town, but cars had obviously gone through, so, believing it was some
repair which had been completed, Nicholas Adams drove on through the
town along the empty, brick-paved street, stopped by traffic lights that
flashed on and off on this traffic-less Sunday, and would be gone next
year when the payments on the system were not met; on under the heavy
trees of the small town that are a part of your heart if it is your town
and you have walked under them, but that are only too heavy, that shut
out the sun and that dampen the houses for a stranger; out past the last
house and onto the highway that rose and fell straight away ahead with
banks of red dirt sliced cleanly away and the second-growth timber on
both sides. It was not his country but it was the middle of fall and all
of this country was good to drive through and to see. The cotton was
picked and in the clearings there were patches of corn, some cut with
streaks of red sorghum, and, driving easily, his son asleep on the seat
by his side, the day’s run made, knowing the town he would reach for the
night, Nick noticed which corn fields had soy beans or peas in them, how
the thickets and the cut-over land lay, where the cabins and houses were
in relation to the fields and the thickets; hunting the country in his
mind as he went by; sizing up each clearing as to feed and cover and
figuring where you would find a covey and which way they would fly.

In shooting quail you must not get between them and their habitual
cover, once the dogs have found them, or when they flush they will come
pouring at you, some rising steep, some skimming by your ears, whirring
into a size you have never seen them in the air as they pass, the only
way being to turn and take them over your shoulder as they go, before
they set their wings and angle down into the thicket. Hunting this
country for quail as his father had taught him, Nicholas Adams started
thinking about his father. When he first thought about him it was always
the eyes. The big frame, the quick movements, the wide shoulders, the
hooked, hawk nose, the beard that covered the weak chin, you never
thought about—it was always the eyes. They were protected in his head
by the formation of the brows; set deep as though a special protection
had been devised for some very valuable instrument. They saw much
farther and much quicker than the human eye sees and they were the great
gift his father had. His father saw as a big-horn ram or as an eagle
sees, literally.

He would be standing with his father on one shore of the lake, his own
eyes were very good then, and his father would say, “They’ve run up the
flag.” Nick could not see the flag or the flag pole. “There,” his father
would say, “it’s your sister Dorothy. She’s got the flag up and she’s
walking out onto the dock.”

Nick would look across the lake and he could see the long wooded
shore-line, the higher timber behind, the point that guarded the bay,
the clear hills of the farm and the white of their cottage in the trees
but he could not see any flag pole, or any dock, only the white of the
beach and the curve of the shore.

“Can you see the sheep on the hillside toward the point?”

“Yes.”

They were a whitish patch on the gray-green of the hill.

“I can count them,” his father said.

Like all men with a faculty that surpasses human requirements, his
father was very nervous. Then, too, he was sentimental, and, like most
sentimental people, he was both cruel and abused. Also, he had much bad
luck, and it was not all of it his own. He had died in a trap that he
had helped only a little to set, and they had all betrayed him in their
various ways before he died. All sentimental people are betrayed so many
times. Nick could not write about him yet, although he would, later, but
the quail country made him remember him as he was when Nick was a boy
and he was very grateful to him for two things; fishing and shooting.
His father was as sound on those two things as he was unsound on sex,
for instance, and Nick was glad that it had been that way; for some one
has to give you your first gun or the opportunity to get it and use it,
and you have to live where there is game or fish if you are to learn
about them, and now, at thirty-eight, he loved to fish and to shoot
exactly as much as when he first had gone with his father. It was a
passion that had never slackened and he was very grateful to his father
for bringing him to know it.

While for the other, that his father was not sound about, all the
equipment you will ever have is provided and each man learns all there
is for him to know about it without advice; and it makes no difference
where you live. He remembered very clearly the only two pieces of
information his father had given him about that. Once when they were out
shooting together Nick shot a red squirrel out of a hemlock tree. The
squirrel fell, wounded, and when Nick picked him up bit the boy clean
through the ball of the thumb.

“The dirty little bugger,” Nick said and smacked the squirrel’s head
against the tree. “Look how he bit me.”

His father looked and said, “Suck it out clean and put some iodine on
when you get home.”

“The little bugger,” Nick said.

“Do you know what a bugger is?” his father asked him.

“We call anything a bugger,” Nick said.

“A bugger is a man who has intercourse with animals.”

“Why?” Nick said.

“I don’t know,” his father said. “But it is a heinous crime.”

Nick’s imagination was both stirred and horrified by this and he thought
of various animals but none seemed attractive or practical and that was
the sum total of direct sexual knowledge bequeathed him by his father
except on one other subject. One morning he read in the paper that
Enrico Caruso had been arrested for mashing.

“What is mashing?”

“It is one of the most heinous of crimes,” his father answered. Nick’s
imagination pictured the great tenor doing something strange, bizarre,
and heinous with a potato masher to a beautiful lady who looked like the
pictures of Anna Held on the inside of cigar boxes. He resolved, with
considerable horror, that when he was old enough he would try mashing at
least once.

His father had summed up the whole matter by stating that masturbation
produced blindness, insanity, and death, while a man who went with
prostitutes would contract hideous venereal diseases and that the thing
to do was to keep your hands off of people. On the other hand his father
had the finest pair of eyes he had ever seen and Nick had loved him very
much and for a long time. Now, knowing how it had all been, even
remembering the earliest times before things had gone badly was not good
remembering. If he wrote it he could get rid of it. He had gotten rid of
many things by writing them. But it was still too early for that. There
were still too many people. So he decided to think of something else.
There was nothing to do about his father and he had thought it all
through many times. The handsome job the undertaker had done on his
father’s face had not blurred in his mind and all the rest of it was
quite clear, including the responsibilities. He had complimented the
undertaker. The undertaker had been both proud and smugly pleased. But
it was not the undertaker that had given him that last face. The
undertaker had only made certain dashingly executed repairs of doubtful
artistic merit. The face had been making itself and being made for a
long time. It had modelled fast in the last three years. It was a good
story but there were still too many people alive for him to write it.

Nick’s own education in those earlier matters had been acquired in the
hemlock woods behind the Indian camp. This was reached by a trail which
ran from the cottage through the woods to the farm and then by a road
which wound through the slashings to the camp. Now he could still feel
all of that trail with bare feet. First there was the pine needle loam
through the hemlock woods behind the cottage where the fallen logs
crumbled into wood dust and long splintered pieces of wood hung like
javelins in the tree that had been struck by lightning. You crossed the
creek on a log and if you stepped off there was the black muck of the
swamp. You climbed a fence out of the woods and the trail was hard in
the sun across the field with cropped grass and sheep sorrel and mullen
growing and to the left the quaky bog of the creek bottom where the
killdeer plover fed. The spring house was in that creek. Below the barn
there was fresh warm manure and the other older manure that was caked
dry on top. Then there was another fence and the hard, hot trail from
the barn to the house and the hot sandy road that ran down to the woods,
crossing the creek, on a bridge this time, where the cat-tails grew that
you soaked in kerosene to make jack-lights with for spearing fish at
night.

Then the main road went off to the left, skirting the woods and climbing
the hill, while you went into the woods on the wide clay and shale road,
cool under the trees, and broadened for them to skid out the hemlock
bark the Indians cut. The hemlock bark was piled in long rows of stacks,
roofed over with more bark, like houses, and the peeled logs lay huge
and yellow where the trees had been felled. They left the logs in the
woods to rot, they did not even clear away or burn the tops. It was only
the bark they wanted for the tannery at Boyne City; hauling it across
the lake on the ice in winter, and each year there was less forest and
more open, hot, shadeless, weed-grown slashing.

But there was still much forest then, virgin forest where the trees grew
high before there were any branches and you walked on the brown, clean,
springy-needled ground with no undergrowth and it was cool on the
hottest days and they three lay against the trunk of a hemlock wider
than two beds are long, with the breeze high in the tops and the cool
light that came in patches, and Billy said:

“You want Trudy again?”

“You want to?”

“Un Huh.”

“Come on.”

“No, here.”

“But Billy——”

“I no mind Billy. He my brother.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

Then afterwards they sat, the three of them, listening for a black
squirrel that was in the top branches where they could not see him. They
were waiting for him to bark again because when he barked he would jerk
his tail and Nick would shoot where he saw any movement. His father gave
him only three cartridges a day to hunt with and he had a single-barrel
twenty-gauge shotgun with a very long barrel.

“Son of a bitch never move,” Billy said.

“You shoot, Nickie. Scare him. We see him jump. Shoot him again,” Trudy
said. It was a long speech for her.

“I’ve only got two shells,” Nick said.

“Son of a bitch,” said Billy.

They sat against the tree and were quiet. Nick was feeling hollow and
happy.

“Eddie says he going to come some night sleep in bed with you sister
Dorothy.”

“What?”

“He said.”

Trudy nodded.

“That’s all he want do,” she said. Eddie was their older half-brother.
He was seventeen.

“If Eddie Gilby ever comes at night and even speaks to Dorothy you know
what I’d do to him? I’d kill him like this.” Nick cocked the gun and
hardly taking aim pulled the trigger, blowing a hole as big as your hand
in the head or belly of that half-breed bastard Eddie Gilby. “Like that.
I’d kill him like that.”

“He better not come then,” Trudy said. She put her hand in Nick’s
pocket.

“He better watch out plenty,” said Billy.

“He’s big bluff,” Trudy was exploring with her hand in Nick’s pocket.
“But don’t you kill him. You get plenty trouble.”

“I’d kill him like that,” Nick said. Eddie Gilby lay on the ground with
all his chest shot away. Nick put his foot on him proudly.

“I’d scalp him,” he said happily.

“No,” said Trudy. “That’s dirty.”

“I’d scalp him and send it to his mother.”

“His mother dead,” Trudy said. “Don’t you kill him, Nickie. Don’t you
kill him for me.”

“After I scalped him I’d throw him to the dogs.”

Billy was very depressed. “He better watch out,” he said gloomily.

“They’d tear him to pieces,” Nick said, pleased with the picture. Then,
having scalped that half-breed renegade and standing, watching the dogs
tear him, his face unchanging, he fell backward against the tree, held
tight around the neck, Trudy holding, choking him, and crying, “No kill
him! No kill him! No kill him! No. No. No. Nickie. Nickie. Nickie!”

“What’s the matter with you?”

“No kill him.”

“I got to kill him.”

“He just a big bluff.”

“All right,” Nickie said. “I won’t kill him unless he comes around the
house. Let go of me.”

“That’s good,” Trudy said. “You want to do anything now? I feel good
now.”

“If Billy goes away.” Nick had killed Eddie Gilby, then pardoned him his
life, and he was a man now.

“You go, Billy. You hang around all the time. Go on.”

“Son a bitch,” Billy said. “I get tired this. What we come? Hunt or
what?”

“You can take the gun. There’s one shell.”

“All right. I get a big black one all right.”

“I’ll holler,” Nick said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Then, later, it was a long time after and Billy was still away.

“You think we make a baby?” Trudy folded her brown legs together happily
and rubbed against him. Something inside Nick had gone a long way away.

“I don’t think so,” he said.

“Make plenty baby what the hell.”

They heard Billy shoot.

“I wonder if he got one.”

“Don’t care,” said Trudy.

Billy came through the trees. He had the gun over his shoulder and he
held a black squirrel by the front paws.

“Look,” he said. “Bigger than a cat. You all through?”

“Where’d you get him?”

“Over there. Saw him jump first.”

“Got to go home,” Nick said.

“No,” said Trudy.

“I got to get there for supper.”

“All right.”

“Want to hunt tomorrow?”

“All right.”

“You can have the squirrel.”

“All right.”

“Come out after supper?”

“No.”

“How you feel?”

“Good.”

“All right.”

“Give me kiss on the face,” said Trudy.

Now, as he rode along the highway in the car and it was getting dark,
Nick was all through thinking about his father. The end of the day never
made him think of him. The end of the day had always belonged to Nick
alone and he never felt right unless he was alone at it. His father came
back to him in the fall of the year, or in the early spring when there
had been jack-snipe on the prairie, or when he saw shocks of corn, or
when he saw a lake, or if he ever saw a horse and buggy, or when he saw,
or heard, wild geese, or in a duck blind; remembering the time an eagle
dropped through the whirling snow to strike a canvas-covered decoy,
rising, his wings beating, the talons caught in the canvas. His father
was with him, suddenly, in deserted orchards and in new-plowed fields,
in thickets, on small hills, or when going through dead grass, whenever
splitting wood or hauling water, by grist mills, cider mills and dams
and always with open fires. The towns he lived in were not towns his
father knew. After he was fifteen he had shared nothing with him.

His father had frost in his beard in cold weather and in hot weather he
sweated very much. He liked to work in the sun on the farm because he
did not have to and he loved manual work, which Nick did not. Nick loved
his father but hated the smell of him and once when he had to wear a
suit of his father’s underwear that had gotten too small for his father
it made him feel sick and he took it off and put it under two stones in
the creek and said that he had lost it. He had told his father how it
was when his father had made him put it on but his father had said it
was freshly washed. It had been, too. When Nick had asked him to smell
of it his father sniffed at it indignantly and said that it was clean
and fresh. When Nick came home from fishing without it and said he lost
it he was whipped for lying.

Afterwards he had sat inside the woodshed with the door open, his
shotgun loaded and cocked, looking across at his father sitting on the
screen porch reading the paper, and thought, “I can blow him to hell. I
can kill him.” Finally he felt his anger go out of him and he felt a
little sick about it being the gun that his father had given him. Then
he had gone to the Indian camp, walking there in the dark, to get rid of
the smell. There was only one person in his family that he liked the
smell of; one sister. All the others he avoided all contact with. That
sense blunted when he started to smoke. It was a good thing. It was good
for a bird dog but it did not help a man.

“What was it like, Papa, when you were a little boy and used to hunt
with the Indians?”

“I don’t know,” Nick was startled. He had not even noticed the boy was
awake. He looked at him sitting beside him on the seat. He had felt
quite alone but this boy had been with him. He wondered for how long.
“We used to go all day to hunt black squirrels,” he said. “My father
only gave me three shells a day because he said that would teach me to
hunt and it wasn’t good for a boy to go banging around. I went with a
boy named Billy Gilby and his sister Trudy. We used to go out nearly
every day all one summer.”

“Those are funny names for Indians.”

“Yes, aren’t they,” Nick said.

“But tell me what they were like.”

“They were Ojibways,” Nick said. “And they were very nice.”

“But what were they like to be with?”

“It’s hard to say,” Nick Adams said. Could you say she did first what no
one has ever done better and mention plump brown legs, flat belly, hard
little breasts, well holding arms, quick searching tongue, the flat
eyes, the good taste of mouth, then uncomfortably, tightly, sweetly,
moistly, lovely, tightly, achingly, fully, finally, unendingly,
never-endingly, never-to-endingly, suddenly ended, the great bird flown
like an owl in the twilight, only it daylight in the woods and hemlock
needles stuck against your belly. So that when you go in a place where
Indians have lived you smell them gone and all the empty pain killer
bottles and the flies that buzz do not kill the sweetgrass smell, the
smoke smell and that other like a fresh cased marten skin. Nor any jokes
about them nor old squaws take that away. Nor the sick sweet smell they
get to have. Nor what they did finally. It wasn’t how they ended. They
all ended the same. Long time ago good. Now no good.

And about the other. When you have shot one bird flying you have shot
all birds flying. They are all different and they fly in different ways
but the sensation is the same and the last one is as good as the first.
He could thank his father for that.

“You might not like them,” Nick said to the boy. “But I think you
would.”

“And my grandfather lived with them too when he was a boy, didn’t he?”

“Yes. When I asked him what they were like he said that he had many
friends among them.”

“Will I ever live with them?”

“I don’t know,” Nick said. “That’s up to you.”

“How old will I be when I get a shotgun and can hunt by myself.”

“Twelve years old if I see you are careful.”

“I wish I was twelve now.”

“You will be, soon enough.”

“What was my grandfather like? I can’t remember him except that he gave
me an air rifle and an American flag when I came over from France that
time. What was he like?”

“He’s hard to describe. He was a great hunter and fisherman and he had
wonderful eyes.”

“Was he greater than you?”

“He was a much better shot and his father was a great wing shot too.”

“I’ll bet he wasn’t better than you.”

“Oh, yes he was. He shot very quickly and beautifully. I’d rather see
him shoot than any man I ever knew. He was always very disappointed in
the way I shot.”

“Why do we never go to pray at the tomb of my grandfather?”

“We live in a different part of the country. It’s a long way from here.”

“In France that wouldn’t make any difference. In France we’d go. I think
I ought to go to pray at the tomb of my grandfather.”

“Sometime we’ll go.”

“I hope we won’t live somewhere so that I can never go to pray at your
tomb when you are dead.”

“We’ll have to arrange it.”

“Don’t you think we might all be buried at a convenient place? We could
all be buried in France. That would be fine.”

“I don’t want to be buried in France,” Nick said.

“Well, then, we’ll have to get some convenient place in America.
Couldn’t we all be buried out at the ranch?”

“That’s an idea.”

“Then I could stop and pray at the tomb of my grandfather on the way to
the ranch.”

“You’re awfully practical.”

“Well, I don’t feel good never to have even visited the tomb of my
grandfather.”

“We’ll have to go,” Nick said. “I can see we’ll have to go.” 
 He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf Stream and he
had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish.  In the first
forty days a boy had been with him.  But after forty days without a
fish the boy's parents had told him that the old man was now definitely
and finally _salao_, which is the worst form of unlucky, and the boy
had gone at their orders in another boat which caught three good fish
the first week.  It made the boy sad to see the old man come in each
day with his skiff empty and he always went down to help him carry
either the coiled lines or the gaff and harpoon and the sail that was
furled around the mast.  The sail was patched with flour sacks and,
furled, it looked like the flag of permanent defeat.

The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in the back of his
neck.  The brown blotches of the benevolent skin cancer the sun brings
from its reflection on the tropic sea were on his cheeks.  The blotches
ran well down the sides of his face and his hands had the deep-creased
scars from handling heavy fish on the cords.  But none of these scars
were fresh.  They were as old as erosions in a fishless desert.

Everything about him was old except his eyes and they were the same
color as the sea and were cheerful and undefeated.

"Santiago," the boy said to him as they climbed the bank from where the
skiff was hauled up.  "I could go with you again.  We've made some
money."

The old man had taught the boy to fish and the boy loved him.

"No," the old man said.  "You're with a lucky boat.  Stay with them."

"But remember how you went eighty-seven days without fish and then we
caught big ones every day for three weeks."

"I remember," the old man said.  "I know you did not leave me because
you doubted."

"It was papa made me leave.  I am a boy and I must obey him."

"I know," the old man said.  "It is quite normal."

"He hasn't much faith."

"No," the old man said.  "But we have.  Haven't we?"

"Yes," the boy said.  "Can I offer you a beer on the Terrace and then
we'll take the stuff home."

"Why not?" the old man said.  "Between fishermen."

They sat on the Terrace and many of the fishermen made fun of the old
man and he was not angry.  Others, of the older fishermen, looked at
him and were sad.  But they did not show it and they spoke politely
about the current and the depths they had drifted their lines at and
the steady good weather and of what they had seen.  The successful
fishermen of that day were already in and had butchered their marlin
out and carried them laid full length across two planks, with two men
staggering at the end of each plank, to the fish house where they
waited for the ice truck to carry them to the market in Havana.  Those
who had caught sharks had taken them to the shark factory on the other
side of the cove where they were hoisted on a block and tackle, their
livers removed, their fins cut off and their hides skinned out and
their flesh cut into strips for salting.

When the wind was in the east a smell came across the harbour from the
shark factory; but today there was only the faint edge of the odour
because the wind had backed into the north and then dropped off and it
was pleasant and sunny on the Terrace.

"Santiago," the boy said.

"Yes," the old man said.  He was holding his glass and thinking of many
years ago.

"Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow?"

"No.  Go and play baseball.  I can still row and Rogelio will throw the
net."

"I would like to go.  If I cannot fish with you, I would like to serve
in some way."

"You bought me a beer," the old man said.  "You are already a man."

"How old was I when you first took me in a boat?"

"Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the fish in too green
and he nearly tore the boat to pieces.  Can you remember?"

"I can remember the tail slapping and banging and the thwart breaking
and the noise of the clubbing.  I can remember you throwing me into the
bow where the wet coiled lines were and feeling the whole boat shiver
and the noise of you clubbing him like chopping a tree down and the
sweet blood smell all over me."

"Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to you?"

"I remember everything from when we first went together."

The old man looked at him with his sun-burned, confident loving eyes.

"If you were my boy I'd take you out and gamble," he said.  "But you
are your father's and your mother's and you are in a lucky boat."

"May I get the sardines?  I know where I can get four baits too."

"I have mine left from today.  I put them in salt in the box."

"Let me get four fresh ones."

"One," the old man said.  His hope and his confidence had never gone.
But now they were freshening as when the breeze rises.

"Two," the boy said.

"Two," the old man agreed.  "You didn't steal them?"

"I would," the boy said.  "But I bought these."

"Thank you," the old man said.  He was too simple to wonder when he had
attained humility.  But he knew he had attained it and he knew it was
not disgraceful and it carried no loss of true pride.

"Tomorrow is going to be a good day with this current," he said.

"Where are you going?" the boy asked.

"Far out to come in when the wind shifts.  I want to be out before it
is light."

"I'll try to get him to work far out," the boy said.  "Then if you hook
something truly big we can come to your aid."

"He does not like to work too far out."

"No," the boy said.  "But I will see something that he cannot see such
as a bird working and get him to come out after dolphin."

"Are his eyes that bad?"

"He is almost blind."

"It is strange," the old man said.  "He never went turtle-ing.  That is
what kills the eyes."

"But you went turtle-ing for years off the Mosquito Coast and your eyes
are good."

"I am a strange old man."

"But are you strong enough now for a truly big fish?"

"I think so.  And there are many tricks."

"Let us take the stuff home," the boy said.  "So I can get the cast net
and go after the sardines."

They picked up the gear from the boat.  The old man carried the mast on
his shoulder and the boy carried the wooden box with the coiled,
hard-braided brown lines, the gaff and the harpoon with its shaft.  The
box with the baits was under the stern of the skiff along with the club
that was used to subdue the big fish when they were brought alongside.
No one would steal from the old man but it was better to take the sail
and the heavy lines home as the dew was bad for them and, though he was
quite sure no local people would steal from him, the old man thought
that a gaff and a harpoon were needless temptations to leave in a boat.

They walked up the road together to the old man's shack and went in
through its open door.  The old man leaned the mast with its wrapped
sail against the wall and the boy put the box and the other gear beside
it.  The mast was nearly as long as the one room of the shack.  The
shack was made of the tough bud-shields of the royal palm which are
called _guano_ and in it there was a bed, a table, one chair, and a
place on the dirt floor to cook with charcoal.  On the brown walls of
the flattened, overlapping leaves of the sturdy fibered _guano_ there
was a picture in color of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and another of the
Virgin of Cobre.  These were relics of his wife.  Once there had been a
tinted photograph of his wife on the wall but he had taken it down
because it made him too lonely to see it and it was on the shelf in the
corner under his clean shirt.

"What do you have to eat?" the boy asked.

"A pot of yellow rice with fish.  Do you want some?"

"No.  I will eat at home.  Do you want me to make the fire?"

"No.  I will make it later on.  Or I may eat the rice cold."

"May I take the cast net?"

"Of course."

There was no cast net and the boy remembered when they had sold it.
But they went through this fiction every day.  There was no pot of
yellow rice and fish and the boy knew this too.

"Eighty-five is a lucky number," the old man said.  "How would you like
to see me bring one in that dressed out over a thousand pounds?"

"I'll get the cast net and go for sardines.  Will you sit in the sun in
the doorway?"

"Yes.  I have yesterday's paper and I will read the baseball."

The boy did not know whether yesterday's paper was a fiction too.  But
the old man brought it out from under the bed.

"Perico gave it to me at the _bodega_," he explained.

"I'll be back when I have the sardines.  I'll keep yours and mine
together on ice and we can share them in the morning.  When I come back
you can tell me about the baseball."

"The Yankees cannot lose."

"But I fear the Indians of Cleveland."

"Have faith in the Yankees my son.  Think of the great DiMaggio."

"I fear both the Tigers of Detroit and the Indians of Cleveland."

"Be careful or you will fear even the Reds of Cincinnati and the White
Sox of Chicago."

"You study it and tell me when I come back."

"Do you think we should buy a terminal of the lottery with an
eighty-five?  Tomorrow is the eighty-fifth day."

"We can do that," the boy said.  "But what about the eighty-seven of
your great record?"

"It could not happen twice.  Do you think you can find an eighty-five?"

"I can order one."

"One sheet.  That's two dollars and a half.  Who can we borrow that
from?"

"That's easy.  I can always borrow two dollars and a half."

"I think perhaps I can too.  But I try not to borrow.  First you
borrow.  Then you beg."

"Keep warm old man," the boy said.  "Remember we are in September."

"The month when the great fish come," the old man said.  "Anyone can be
a fisherman in May."

"I go now for the sardines," the boy said.

When the boy came back the old man was asleep in the chair and the sun
was down.  The boy took the old army blanket off the bed and spread it
over the back of the chair and over the old man's shoulders.  They were
strange shoulders, still powerful although very old, and the neck was
still strong too and the creases did not show so much when the old man
was asleep and his head fallen forward.  His shirt had been patched so
many times that it was like the sail and the patches were faded to many
different shades by the sun.  The old man's head was very old though
and with his eyes closed there was no life in his face.  The newspaper
lay across his knees and the weight of his arm held it there in the
evening breeze.  He was barefooted.

The boy left him there and when he came back the old man was still
asleep.

"Wake up old man," the boy said and put his hand on one of the old
man's knees.

The old man opened his eyes and for a moment he was coming back from a
long way away.  Then he smiled.

"What have you got?" he asked.

"Supper," said the boy.  "We're going to have supper."

"I'm not very hungry."

"Come on and eat.  You can't fish and not eat."

"I have," the old man said getting up and taking the newspaper and
folding it.  Then he started to fold the blanket.

"Keep the blanket around you," the boy said.  "You'll not fish without
eating while I'm alive."

"Then live a long time and take care of yourself," the old man said.
"What are we eating?"

"Black beans and rice, fried bananas, and some stew."

The boy had brought them in a two-decker metal container from the
Terrace.  The two sets of knives and forks and spoons were in his
pocket with a paper napkin wrapped around each set.

"Who gave this to you?"

"Martin.  The owner."

"I must thank him."

"I thanked him already," the boy said.  "You don't need to thank him."

"I'll give him the belly meat of a big fish," the old man said.  "Has
he done this for us more than once?"

"I think so."

"I must give him something more than the belly meat then.  He is very
thoughtful for us."

"He sent two beers."

"I like the beer in cans best."

"I know.  But this is in bottles, Hatuey beer, and I take back the
bottles."

"That's very kind of you," the old man said.  "Should we eat?"

"I've been asking you to," the boy told him gently.  "I have not wished
to open the container until you were ready."

"I'm ready now," the old man said.  "I only needed time to wash."

Where did you wash? the boy thought.  The village water supply was two
streets down the road.  I must have water here for him, the boy
thought, and soap and a good towel.  Why am I so thoughtless?  I must
get him another shirt and a jacket for the winter and some sort of
shoes and another blanket.

"Your stew is excellent," the old man said.

"Tell me about the baseball," the boy asked him.

"In the American League it is the Yankees as I said," the old man said
happily.

"They lost today," the boy told him.

"That means nothing.  The great DiMaggio is himself again."

"They have other men on the team."

"Naturally.  But he makes the difference.  In the other league, between
Brooklyn and Philadelphia I must take Brooklyn.  But then I think of
Dick Sisler and those great drives in the old park."

"There was nothing ever like them.  He hits the longest ball I have
ever seen."

"Do you remember when he used to come to the Terrace?  I wanted to take
him fishing but I was too timid to ask him.  Then I asked you to ask
him and you were too timid."

"I know.  It was a great mistake.  He might have gone with us.  Then we
would have that for all of our lives."

"I would like to take the great DiMaggio fishing," the old man said.
"They say his father was a fisherman.  Maybe he was as poor as we are
and would understand."

"The great Sisler's father was never poor and he, the father, was
playing in the big leagues when he was my age."

"When I was your age I was before the mast on a square rigged ship that
ran to Africa and I have seen lions on the beaches in the evening."

"I know.  You told me."

"Should we talk about Africa or about baseball?"

"Baseball I think," the boy said.  "Tell me about the great John J.
McGraw."  He said _Jota_ for J.

"He used to come to the Terrace sometimes too in the older days.  But
he was rough and harsh-spoken and difficult when he was drinking.  His
mind was on horses as well as baseball.  At least he carried lists of
horses at all times in his pocket and frequently spoke the names of
horses on the telephone."

"He was a great manager," the boy said.  "My father thinks he was the
greatest."

"Because he came here the most times," the old man said.  "If Durocher
had continued to come here each year your father would think him the
greatest manager."

"Who is the greatest manager, really, Luque or Mike Gonzalez?"

"I think they are equal."

"And the best fisherman is you."

"No.  I know others better."

"_Qué va_," the boy said.  "There are many good fishermen and some
great ones.  But there is only you."

"Thank you.  You make me happy.  I hope no fish will come along so
great that he will prove us wrong."

"There is no such fish if you are still strong as you say."

"I may not be as strong as I think," the old man said.  "But I know
many tricks and I have resolution."

"You ought to go to bed now so that you will be fresh in the morning.
I will take the things back to the Terrace."

"Good night then.  I will wake you in the morning."

"You're my alarm clock," the boy said.

"Age is my alarm clock," the old man said.  "Why do old men wake so
early?  Is it to have one longer day?"

"I don't know," the boy said.  "All I know is that young boys sleep
late and hard."

"I can remember it," the old man said.  "I'll waken you in time."

"I do not like for him to waken me.  It is as though I were inferior."

"I know."

"Sleep well, old man."

The boy went out.  They had eaten with no light on the table and the
old man took off his trousers and went to bed in the dark.  He rolled
his trousers up to make a pillow, putting the newspaper inside them.
He rolled himself in the blanket and slept on the other old newspapers
that covered the springs of the bed.

He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of Africa when he was a
boy and the long golden beaches and the white beaches, so white they
hurt your eyes, and the high capes and the great brown mountains.  He
lived along that coast now every night and in his dreams he heard the
surf roar and saw the native boats come riding through it.  He smelled
the tar and oakum of the deck as he slept and he smelled the smell of
Africa that the land breeze brought at morning.

Usually when he smelled the land breeze he woke up and dressed to go
and wake the boy.  But tonight the smell of the land breeze came very
early and he knew it was too early in his dream and went on dreaming to
see the white peaks of the Islands rising from the sea and then he
dreamed of the different harbours and roadsteads of the Canary Islands.

He no longer dreamed of storms, nor of women, nor of great occurrences,
nor of great fish, nor fights, nor contests of strength, nor of his
wife.  He only dreamed of places now and of the lions on the beach.
They played like young cats in the dusk and he loved them as he loved
the boy.  He never dreamed about the boy.  He simply woke, looked out
the open door at the moon and unrolled his trousers and put them on.
He urinated outside the shack and then went up the road to wake the
boy.  He was shivering with the morning cold.  But he knew he would
shiver himself warm and that soon he would be rowing.

The door of the house where the boy lived was unlocked and he opened it
and walked in quietly with his bare feet.  The boy was asleep on a cot
in the first room and the old man could see him clearly with the light
that came in from the dying moon.  He took hold of one foot gently and
held it until the boy woke and turned and looked at him.  The old man
nodded and the boy took his trousers from the chair by the bed and,
sitting on the bed, pulled them on.

The old man went out the door and the boy came after him.  He was
sleepy and the old man put his arm across his shoulders and said, "I am
sorry."

"_Qué va_," the boy said.  "It is what a man must do."

They walked down the road to the old man's shack and all along the
road, in the dark, barefoot men were moving, carrying the masts of
their boats.

When they reached the old man's shack the boy took the rolls of line in
the basket and the harpoon and gaff and the old man carried the mast
with the furled sail on his shoulder.

"Do you want coffee?" the boy asked.

"We'll put the gear in the boat and then get some."

They had coffee from condensed milk cans at an early morning place that
served fishermen.

"How did you sleep old man?" the boy asked.  He was waking up now
although it was still hard for him to leave his sleep.

"Very well, Manolin," the old man said.  "I feel confident today."

"So do I," the boy said.  "Now I must get your sardines and mine and
your fresh baits.  He brings our gear himself.  He never wants anyone
to carry anything."

"We're different," the old man said.  "I let you carry things when you
were five years old."

"I know it," the boy said.  "I'll be right back.  Have another coffee.
We have credit here."

He walked off, bare-footed on the coral rocks, to the ice house where
the baits were stored.

The old man drank his coffee slowly.  It was all he would have all day
and he knew that he should take it.  For a long time now eating had
bored him and he never carried a lunch.  He had a bottle of water in
the bow of the skiff and that was all he needed for the day.

The boy was back now with the sardines and the two baits wrapped in a
newspaper and they went down the trail to the skiff, feeling the
pebbled sand under their feet, and lifted the skiff and slid her into
the water.

"Good luck old man."

"Good luck," the old man said.  He fitted the rope lashings of the oars
onto the thole pins and, leaning forward against the thrust of the
blades in the water, he began to row out of the harbour in the dark.
There were other boats from the other beaches going out to sea and the
old man heard the dip and push of their oars even though he could not
see them now the moon was below the hills.

Sometimes someone would speak in a boat.  But most of the boats were
silent except for the dip of the oars.  They spread apart after they
were out of the mouth of the harbour and each one headed for the part
of the ocean where he hoped to find fish.  The old man knew he was
going far out and he left the smell of the land behind and rowed out
into the clean early morning smell of the ocean.  He saw the
phosphorescence of the Gulf weed in the water as he rowed over the part
of the ocean that the fishermen called the great well because there was
a sudden deep of seven hundred fathoms where all sorts of fish
congregated because of the swirl the current made against the steep
walls of the floor of the ocean.  Here there were concentrations of
shrimp and bait fish and sometimes schools of squid in the deepest
holes and these rose close to the surface at night where all the
wandering fish fed on them.

In the dark the old man could feel the morning coming and as he rowed
he heard the trembling sound as flying fish left the water and the
hissing that their stiff set wings made as they soared away in the
darkness.  He was very fond of flying fish as they were his principal
friends on the ocean.  He was sorry for the birds, especially the small
delicate dark terns that were always flying and looking and almost
never finding, and he thought, "The birds have a harder life than we do
except for the robber birds and the heavy strong ones.  Why did they
make birds so delicate and fine as those sea swallows when the ocean
can be so cruel?  She is kind and very beautiful.  But she can be so
cruel and it comes so suddenly and such birds that fly, dipping and
hunting, with their small sad voices are made too delicately for the
sea."

He always thought of the sea as _la mar_ which is what people call her
in Spanish when they love her.  Sometimes those who love her say bad
things of her but they are always said as though she were a woman.
Some of the younger fishermen, those who used buoys as floats for their
lines and had motorboats, bought when the shark livers had brought much
money, spoke of her as _el mar_ which is masculine.  They spoke of her
as a contestant or a place or even an enemy.  But the old man always
thought of her as feminine and as something that gave or withheld great
favours, and if she did wild or wicked things it was because she could
not help them.  The moon affects her as it does a woman, he thought.

He was rowing steadily and it was no effort for him since he kept well
within his speed and the surface of the ocean was flat except for the
occasional swirls of the current.  He was letting the current do a
third of the work and as it started to be light he saw he was already
further out than he had hoped to be at this hour.

I worked the deep wells for a week and did nothing, he thought.  Today
I'll work out where the schools of bonita and albacore are and maybe
there will be a big one with them.

Before it was really light he had his baits out and was drifting with
the current.  One bait was down forty fathoms.  The second was at
seventy-five and the third and fourth were down in the blue water at
one hundred and one hundred and twenty-five fathoms.  Each bait hung
head down with the shank of the hook inside the bait fish, tied and
sewed solid and all the projecting part of the hook, the curve and the
point, was covered with fresh sardines.  Each sardine was hooked
through both eyes so that they made a half-garland on the projecting
steel.  There was no part of the hook that a great fish could feel
which was not sweet smelling and good tasting.

The boy had given him two fresh small tunas, or albacores, which hung
on the two deepest lines like plummets and, on the others, he had a big
blue runner and a yellow jack that had been used before; but they were
in good condition still and had the excellent sardines to give them
scent and attractiveness.  Each line, as thick around as a big pencil,
was looped onto a green-sapped stick so that any pull or touch on the
bait would make the stick dip and each line had two forty-fathom coils
which could be made fast to the other spare coils so that, if it were
necessary, a fish could take out over three hundred fathoms of line.

Now the man watched the dip of the three sticks over the side of the
skiff and rowed gently to keep the lines straight up and down and at
their proper depths.  It was quite light and any moment now the sun
would rise.

The sun rose thinly from the sea and the old man could see the other
boats, low on the water and well in toward the shore, spread out across
the current.  Then the sun was brighter and the glare came on the water
and then, as it rose clear, the flat sea sent it back at his eyes so
that it hurt sharply and he rowed without looking into it.  He looked
down into the water and watched the lines that went straight down into
the dark of the water.  He kept them straighter than anyone did, so
that at each level in the darkness of the stream there would be a bait
waiting exactly where he wished it to be for any fish that swam there.
Others let them drift with the current and sometimes they were at sixty
fathoms when the fishermen thought they were at a hundred.

But, he thought, I keep them with precision.  Only I have no luck any
more.  But who knows?  Maybe today.  Every day is a new day.  It is
better to be lucky.  But I would rather be exact.  Then when luck comes
you are ready.

The sun was two hours higher now and it did not hurt his eyes so much
to look into the east.  There were only three boats in sight now and
they showed very low and far inshore.

All my life the early sun has hurt my eyes, he thought.  Yet they are
still good.  In the evening I can look straight into it without getting
the blackness.  It has more force in the evening too.  But in the
morning it is painful.

Just then he saw a man-of-war bird with his long black wings circling
in the sky ahead of him.  He made a quick drop, slanting down on his
back-swept wings, and then circled again.

"He's got something," the old man said aloud.  "He's not just looking."

He rowed slowly and steadily toward where the bird was circling.  He
did not hurry and he kept his lines straight up and down.  But he
crowded the current a little so that he was still fishing correctly
though faster than he would have fished if he was not trying to use the
bird.

The bird went higher in the air and circled again, his wings
motionless.  Then he dove suddenly and the old man saw flying fish
spurt out of the water and sail desperately over the surface.

"Dolphin," the old man said aloud.  "Big dolphin."

He shipped his oars and brought a small line from under the bow.  It
had a wire leader and a medium-sized hook and he baited it with one of
the sardines.  He let it go over the side and then made it fast to a
ring bolt in the stern.  Then he baited another line and left it coiled
in the shade of the bow.  He went back to rowing and to watching the
long-winged black bird who was working, now, low over the water.

As he watched the bird dipped again slanting his wings for the dive and
then swinging them wildly and ineffectually as he followed the flying
fish.  The old man could see the slight bulge in the water that the big
dolphin raised as they followed the escaping fish.  The dolphin were
cutting through the water below the flight of the fish and would be in
the water, driving at speed, when the fish dropped.  It is a big school
of dolphin, he thought.  They are wide spread and the flying fish have
little chance.  The bird has no chance.  The flying fish are too big
for him and they go too fast.

He watched the flying fish burst out again and again and the
ineffectual movements of the bird.  That school has gotten away from
me, he thought.  They are moving out too fast and too far.  But perhaps
I will pick up a stray and perhaps my big fish is around them.  My big
fish must be somewhere.

The clouds over the land now rose like mountains and the coast was only
a long green line with the gray blue hills behind it.  The water was a
dark blue now, so dark that it was almost purple.  As he looked down
into it he saw the red sifting of the plankton in the dark water and
the strange light the sun made now.  He watched his lines to see them
go straight down out of sight into the water and he was happy to see so
much plankton because it meant fish.  The strange light the sun made in
the water, now that the sun was higher, meant good weather and so did
the shape of the clouds over the land.  But the bird was almost out of
sight now and nothing showed on the surface of the water but some
patches of yellow, sun-bleached Sargasso weed and the purple,
formalized, iridescent, gelatinous bladder of a Portuguese man-of-war
floating close beside the boat.  It turned on its side and then righted
itself.  It floated cheerfully as a bubble with its long deadly purple
filaments trailing a yard behind it in the water.

"_Agua mala_," the man said.  "You whore."

From where he swung lightly against his oars he looked down into the
water and saw the tiny fish that were coloured like the trailing
filaments and swam between them and under the small shade the bubble
made as it drifted.  They were immune to its poison.  But men were not
and when some of the filaments would catch on a line and rest there
slimy and purple while the old man was working a fish, he would have
welts and sores on his arms and hands of the sort that poison ivy or
poison oak can give.  But these poisonings from the _agua mala_ came
quickly and struck like a whiplash.

The iridescent bubbles were beautiful.  But they were the falsest thing
in the sea and the old man loved to see the big sea turtles eating
them.  The turtles saw them, approached them from the front, then shut
their eyes so they were completely carapaced and ate them filaments and
all.  The old man loved to see the turtles eat them and he loved to
walk on them on the beach after a storm and hear them pop when he
stepped on them with the horny soles of his feet.

He loved green turtles and hawks-bills with their elegance and speed
and their great value and he had a friendly contempt for the huge,
stupid loggerheads, yellow in their armour-plating, strange in their
love-making, and happily eating the Portuguese men-of-war with their
eyes shut.

He had no mysticism about turtles although he had gone in turtle boats
for many years.  He was sorry for them all, even the great trunk backs
that were as long as the skiff and weighed a ton.  Most people are
heartless about turtles because a turtle's heart will beat for hours
after he has been cut up and butchered.  But the old man thought, I
have such a heart too and my feet and hands are like theirs.  He ate
the white eggs to give himself strength.  He ate them all through May
to be strong in September and October for the truly big fish.

He also drank a cup of shark liver oil each day from the big drum in
the shack where many of the fishermen kept their gear.  It was there
for all fishermen who wanted it.  Most fishermen hated the taste.  But
it was no worse than getting up at the hours that they rose and it was
very good against all colds and grippes and it was good for the eyes.

Now the old man looked up and saw that the bird was circling again.

"He's found fish," he said aloud.  No flying fish broke the surface and
there was no scattering of bait fish.  But as the old man watched, a
small tuna rose in the air, turned and dropped head first into the
water.  The tuna shone silver in the sun and after he had dropped back
into the water another and another rose and they were jumping in all
directions, churning the water and leaping in long jumps after the
bait.  They were circling it and driving it.

If they don't travel too fast I will get into them, the old man
thought, and he watched the school working the water white and the bird
now dropping and dipping into the bait fish that were forced to the
surface in their panic.

"The bird is a great help," the old man said.  Just then the stern line
came taut under his foot, where he had kept a loop of the line, and he
dropped his oars and felt the weight of the small tuna's shivering pull
as he held the line firm and commenced to haul it in.  The shivering
increased as he pulled in and he could see the blue back of the fish in
the water and the gold of his sides before he swung him over the side
and into the boat.  He lay in the stern in the sun, compact and bullet
shaped, his big, unintelligent eyes staring as he thumped his life out
against the planking of the boat with the quick shivering strokes of
his neat, fast-moving tail.  The old man hit him on the head for
kindness and kicked him, his body still shuddering, under the shade of
the stern.

"Albacore," he said aloud.  "He'll make a beautiful bait.  He'll weigh
ten pounds."

He did not remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was
by himself.  He had sung when he was by himself in the old days and he
had sung at night sometimes when he was alone steering on his watch in
the smacks or in the turtle boats.  He had probably started to talk
aloud, when alone, when the boy had left.  But he did not remember.
When he and the boy fished together they usually spoke only when it was
necessary.  They talked at night or when they were storm-bound by bad
weather.  It was considered a virtue not to talk unnecessarily at sea
and the old man had always considered it so and respected it.  But now
he said his thoughts aloud many times since there was no one that they
could annoy.

"If the others heard me talking out loud they would think that I am
crazy," he said aloud.  "But since I am not crazy, I do not care.  And
the rich have radios to talk to them in their boats and to bring them
the baseball."

Now is no time to think of baseball, he thought.  Now is the time to
think of only one thing.  That which I was born for.  There might be a
big one around that school, he thought.  I picked up only a straggler
from the albacore that were feeding.  But they are working far out and
fast.  Everything that shows on the surface today travels very fast and
to the north-east.  Can that be the time of day?  Or is it some sign of
weather that I do not know?

He could not see the green of the shore now but only the tops of the
blue hills that showed white as though they were snow-capped and the
clouds that looked like high snow mountains above them.  The sea was
very dark and the light made prisms in the water.  The myriad flecks of
the plankton were annulled now by the high sun and it was only the
great deep prisms in the blue water that the old man saw now with his
lines going straight down into the water that was a mile deep.

The tuna, the fishermen called all the fish of that species tuna and
only distinguished among them by their proper names when they came to
sell them or to trade them for baits, were down again.  The sun was hot
now and the old man felt it on the back of his neck and felt the sweat
trickle down his back as he rowed.

I could just drift, he thought, and sleep and put a bight of line
around my toe to wake me.  But today is eighty-five days and I should
fish the day well.

Just then, watching his lines, he saw one of the projecting green
sticks dip sharply.

"Yes," he said.  "Yes," and shipped his oars without bumping the boat.
He reached out for the line and held it softly between the thumb and
forefinger of his right hand.  He felt no strain nor weight and he held
the line lightly.  Then it came again.  This time it was a tentative
pull, not solid nor heavy, and he knew exactly what it was.  One
hundred fathoms down a marlin was eating the sardines that covered the
point and the shank of the hook where the hand-forged hook projected
from the head of the small tuna.

The old man held the line delicately, and softly, with his left hand,
unleashed it from the stick.  Now he could let it run through his
fingers without the fish feeling any tension.

This far out, he must be huge in this month, he thought.  Eat them,
fish.  Eat them.  Please eat them.  How fresh they are and you down
there six hundred feet in that cold water in the dark.  Make another
turn in the dark and come back and eat them.

He felt the light delicate pulling and then a harder pull when a
sardine's head must have been more difficult to break from the hook.
Then there was nothing.

"Come on," the old man said aloud.  "Make another turn.  Just smell
them.  Aren't they lovely?  Eat them good now and then there is the
tuna.  Hard and cold and lovely.  Don't be shy, fish.  Eat them."

He waited with the line between his thumb and his finger, watching it
and the other lines at the same time for the fish might have swum up or
down.  Then came the same delicate pulling touch again.

"He'll take it," the old man said aloud.  "God help him to take it."

He did not take it though.  He was gone and the old man felt nothing.

"He can't have gone," he said.  "Christ knows he can't have gone.  He's
making a turn.  Maybe he has been hooked before and he remembers
something of it."

Then he felt the gentle touch on the line and he was happy.

"It was only his turn," he said.  "He'll take it."

He was happy feeling the gentle pulling and then he felt something hard
and unbelievably heavy.  It was the weight of the fish and he let the
line slip down, down, down, unrolling off the first of the two reserve
coils.  As it went down, slipping lightly through the old man's
fingers, he still could feel the great weight, though the pressure of
his thumb and finger were almost imperceptible.

"What a fish," he said.  "He has it sideways in his mouth now and he is
moving off with it."

Then he will turn and swallow it, he thought.  He did not say that
because he knew that if you said a good thing it might not happen.  He
knew what a huge fish this was and he thought of him moving away in the
darkness with the tuna held crosswise in his mouth.  At that moment he
felt him stop moving but the weight was still there.  Then the weight
increased and he gave more line.  He tightened the pressure of his
thumb and finger for a moment and the weight increased and was going
straight down.

"He's taken it," he said.  "Now I'll let him eat it well."

He let the line slip through his fingers while he reached down with his
left hand and made fast the free end of the two reserve coils to the
loop of the two reserve coils of the next line.  Now he was ready.  He
had three forty-fathom coils of line in reserve now, as well as the
coil he was using.

"Eat it a little more," he said.  "Eat it well."

Eat it so that the point of the hook goes into your heart and kills
you, he thought.  Come up easy and let me put the harpoon into you.
All right.  Are you ready?  Have you been long enough at table?

"Now!" he said aloud and struck hard with both hands, gained a yard of
line and then struck again and again, swinging with each arm
alternately on the cord with all the strength of his arms and the
pivoted weight of his body.

Nothing happened.  The fish just moved away slowly and the old man
could not raise him an inch.  His line was strong and made for heavy
fish and he held it against his back until it was so taut that beads of
water were jumping from it.  Then it began to make a slow hissing sound
in the water and he still held it, bracing himself against the thwart
and leaning back against the pull.  The boat began to move slowly off
toward the North-West.

The fish moved steadily and they travelled slowly on the calm water.
The other baits were still in the water but there was nothing to be
done.

"I wish I had the boy," the old man said aloud.  "I'm being towed by a
fish and I'm the towing bitt.  I could make the line fast.  But then he
could break it.  I must hold him all I can and give him line when he
must have it.  Thank God he is travelling and not going down."

What I will do if he decides to go down, I don't know.  What I'll do if
he sounds and dies I don't know.  But I'll do something.  There are
plenty of things I can do.

He held the line against his back and watched its slant in the water
and the skiff moving steadily to the North-West.

This will kill him, the old man thought.  He can't do this forever.
But four hours later the fish was still swimming steadily out to sea,
towing the skiff, and the old man was still braced solidly with the
line across his back.

"It was noon when I hooked him," he said.  "And I have never seen him."

He had pushed his straw hat hard down on his head before he hooked the
fish and it was cutting his forehead.  He was thirsty too and he got
down on his knees and, being careful not to jerk on the line, moved as
far into the bow as he could get and reached the water bottle with one
hand.  He opened it and drank a little.  Then he rested against the
bow.  He rested sitting on the un-stepped mast and sail and tried not
to think but only to endure.

Then he looked behind him and saw that no land was visible.  That makes
no difference, he thought.  I can always come in on the glow from
Havana.  There are two more hours before the sun sets and maybe he will
come up before that.  If he doesn't maybe he will come up with the
moon.  If he does not do that maybe he will come up with the sunrise.
I have no cramps and I feel strong.  It is he that has the hook in his
mouth.  But what a fish to pull like that.  He must have his mouth shut
tight on the wire.  I wish I could see him.  I wish I could see him
only once to know what I have against me.

The fish never changed his course nor his direction all that night as
far as the man could tell from watching the stars.  It was cold after
the sun went down and the old man's sweat dried cold on his back and
his arms and his old legs.  During the day he had taken the sack that
covered the bait box and spread it in the sun to dry.  After the sun
went down he tied it around his neck so that it hung down over his back
and he cautiously worked it down under the line that was across his
shoulders now.  The sack cushioned the line and he had found a way of
leaning forward against the bow so that he was almost comfortable.  The
position actually was only somewhat less intolerable; but he thought of
it as almost comfortable.

I can do nothing with him and he can do nothing with me, he thought.
Not as long as he keeps this up.

Once he stood up and urinated over the side of the skiff and looked at
the stars and checked his course.  The line showed like a
phosphorescent streak in the water straight out from his shoulders.
They were moving more slowly now and the glow of Havana was not so
strong, so that he knew the current must be carrying them to the
eastward.  If I lose the glare of Havana we must be going more to the
eastward, he thought.  For if the fish's course held true I must see it
for many more hours.  I wonder how the baseball came out in the grand
leagues today, he thought.  It would be wonderful to do this with a
radio.  Then he thought, think of it always.  Think of what you are
doing.  You must do nothing stupid.

Then he said aloud, "I wish I had the boy.  To help me and to see this."

No one should be alone in their old age, he thought.  But it is
unavoidable.  I must remember to eat the tuna before he spoils in order
to keep strong.  Remember, no matter how little you want to, that you
must eat him in the morning.  Remember, he said to himself.

During the night two porpoise came around the boat and he could hear
them rolling and blowing.  He could tell the difference between the
blowing noise the male made and the sighing blow of the female.

"They are good," he said.  "They play and make jokes and love one
another.  They are our brothers like the flying fish."

Then he began to pity the great fish that he had hooked.  He is
wonderful and strange and who knows how old he is, he thought.  Never
have I had such a strong fish nor one who acted so strangely.  Perhaps
he is too wise to jump.  He could ruin me by jumping or by a wild rush.
But perhaps he has been hooked many times before and he knows that this
is how he should make his fight.  He cannot know that it is only one
man against him, nor that it is an old man.  But what a great fish he
is and what he will bring in the market if the flesh is good.  He took
the bait like a male and he pulls like a male and his fight has no
panic in it.  I wonder if he has any plans or if he is just as
desperate as I am?

He remembered the time he had hooked one of a pair of marlin.  The male
fish always let the female fish feed first and the hooked fish, the
female, made a wild, panic-stricken, despairing fight that soon
exhausted her, and all the time the male had stayed with her, crossing
the line and circling with her on the surface.  He had stayed so close
that the old man was afraid he would cut the line with his tail which
was sharp as a scythe and almost of that size and shape.  When the old
man had gaffed her and clubbed her, holding the rapier bill with its
sandpaper edge and clubbing her across the top of her head until her
colour turned to a colour almost like the backing of mirrors, and then,
with the boy's aid, hoisted her aboard, the male fish had stayed by the
side of the boat.  Then, while the old man was clearing the lines and
preparing the harpoon, the male fish jumped high into the air beside
the boat to see where the female was and then went down deep, his
lavender wings, that were his pectoral fins, spread wide and all his
wide lavender stripes showing.  He was beautiful, the old man
remembered, and he had stayed.

That was the saddest thing I ever saw with them, the old man thought.
The boy was sad too and we begged her pardon and butchered her promptly.

"I wish the boy was here," he said aloud and settled himself against
the rounded planks of the bow and felt the strength of the great fish
through the line he held across his shoulders moving steadily toward
whatever he had chosen.

When once, through my treachery, it had been necessary to him to make a
choice, the old man thought.

His choice had been to stay in the deep dark water far out beyond all
snares and traps and treacheries.  My choice was to go there to find
him beyond all people.  Beyond all people in the world.  Now we are
joined together and have been since noon.  And no one to help either
one of us.

Perhaps I should not have been a fisherman, he thought.  But that was
the thing that I was born for.  I must surely remember to eat the tuna
after it gets light.

Some time before daylight something took one of the baits that were
behind him.  He heard the stick break and the line begin to rush out
over the gunwale of the skiff.  In the darkness he loosened his sheath
knife and taking all the strain of the fish on his left shoulder he
leaned back and cut the line against the wood of the gunwale.  Then he
cut the other line closest to him and in the dark made the loose ends
of the reserve coils fast.  He worked skillfully with the one hand and
put his foot on the coils to hold them as he drew his knots tight.  Now
he had six reserve coils of line.  There were two from each bait he had
severed and the two from the bait the fish had taken and they were all
connected.

After it is light, he thought, I will work back to the forty-fathom
bait and cut it away too and link up the reserve coils.  I will have
lost two hundred fathoms of good Catalan _cordel_ and the hooks and
leaders.  That can be replaced.  But who replaces this fish if I hook
some fish and it cuts him off?  I don't know what that fish was that
took the bait just now.  It could have been a marlin or a broadbill or
a shark.  I never felt him.  I had to get rid of him too fast.

Aloud he said, "I wish I had the boy."

But you haven't got the boy, he thought.  You have only yourself and
you had better work back to the last line now, in the dark or not in
the dark, and cut it away and hook up the two reserve coils.

So he did it.  It was difficult in the dark and once the fish made a
surge that pulled him down on his face and made a cut below his eye.
The blood ran down his cheek a little way.  But it coagulated and dried
before it reached his chin and he worked his way back to the bow and
rested against the wood.  He adjusted the sack and carefully worked the
line so that it came across a new part of his shoulders and, holding it
anchored with his shoulders, he carefully felt the pull of the fish and
then felt with his hand the progress of the skiff through the water.

I wonder what he made that lurch for, he thought.  The wire must have
slipped on the great hill of his back.  Certainly his back cannot feel
as badly as mine does.  But he cannot pull this skiff forever, no
matter how great he is.  Now everything is cleared away that might make
trouble and I have a big reserve of line; all that a man can ask.

"Fish," he said softly, aloud, "I'll stay with you until I am dead."

He'll stay with me too, I suppose, the old man thought and he waited
for it to be light.  It was cold now in the time before daylight and he
pushed against the wood to be warm.  I can do it as long as he can, he
thought.  And in the first light the line extended out and down into
the water.  The boat moved steadily and when the first edge of the sun
rose it was on the old man's right shoulder.

"He's headed north," the old man said.  The current will have set us
far to the eastward, he thought.  I wish he would turn with the
current.  That would show that he was tiring.

When the sun had risen further the old man realized that the fish was
not tiring.  There was only one favorable sign.  The slant of the line
showed he was swimming at a lesser depth.  That did not necessarily
mean that he would jump.  But he might.

"God let him jump," the old man said.  "I have enough line to handle
him."

Maybe if I can increase the tension just a little it will hurt him and
he will jump, he thought.  Now that it is daylight let him jump so that
he'll fill the sacks along his backbone with air and then he cannot go
deep to die.

He tried to increase the tension, but the line had been taut up to the
very edge of the breaking point since he had hooked the fish and he
felt the harshness as he leaned back to pull and knew he could put no
more strain on it.  I must not jerk it ever, he thought.  Each jerk
widens the cut the hook makes and then when he does jump he might throw
it.  Anyway I feel better with the sun and for once I do not have to
look into it.

There was yellow weed on the line but the old man knew that only made
an added drag and he was pleased.  It was the yellow Gulf weed that had
made so much phosphorescence in the night.

"Fish," he said, "I love you and respect you very much.  But I will
kill you dead before this day ends."

Let us hope so, he thought.

A small bird came toward the skiff from the north.  He was a warbler
and flying very low over the water.  The old man could see that he was
very tired.

The bird made the stern of the boat and rested there.  Then he flew
around the old man's head and rested on the line where he was more
comfortable.

"How old are you?" the old man asked the bird.  "Is this your first
trip?"

The bird looked at him when he spoke.  He was too tired even to examine
the line and he teetered on it as his delicate feet gripped it fast.

"It's steady," the old man told him.  "It's too steady.  You shouldn't
be that tired after a windless night.  What are birds coming to?"

The hawks, he thought, that come out to sea to meet them.  But he said
nothing of this to the bird who could not understand him anyway and who
would learn about the hawks soon enough.

"Take a good rest, small bird," he said.  "Then go in and take your
chance like any man or bird or fish."

It encouraged him to talk because his back had stiffened in the night
and it hurt truly now.

"Stay at my house if you like, bird," he said.  "I am sorry I cannot
hoist the sail and take you in with the small breeze that is rising.
But I am with a friend."

Just then the fish gave a sudden lurch that pulled the old man down
onto the bow and would have pulled him overboard if he had not braced
himself and given some line.

The bird had flown up when the line jerked and the old man had not even
seen him go.  He felt the line carefully with his right hand and
noticed his hand was bleeding.

"Something hurt him then," he said aloud and pulled back on the line to
see if he could turn the fish.  But when he was touching the breaking
point he held steady and settled back against the strain of the line.

"You're feeling it now, fish," he said.  "And so, God knows, am I."

He looked around for the bird now because he would have liked him for
company.  The bird was gone.

You did not stay long, the man thought.  But it is rougher where you
are going until you make the shore.  How did I let the fish cut me with
that one quick pull he made?  I must be getting very stupid.  Or
perhaps I was looking at the small bird and thinking of him.  Now I
will pay attention to my work and then I must eat the tuna so that I
will not have a failure of strength.

"I wish the boy were here and that I had some salt," he said aloud.

Shifting the weight of the line to his left shoulder and kneeling
carefully he washed his hand in the ocean and held it there, submerged,
for more than a minute watching the blood trail away and the steady
movement of the water against his hand as the boat moved.

"He has slowed much," he said.

The old man would have liked to keep his hand in the salt water longer
but he was afraid of another sudden lurch by the fish and he stood up
and braced himself and held his hand up against the sun.  It was only a
line burn that had cut his flesh.  But it was in the working part of
his hand.  He knew he would need his hands before this was over and he
did not like to be cut before it started.

"Now," he said, when his hand had dried, "I must eat the small tuna.  I
can reach him with the gaff and eat him here in comfort."

He knelt down and found the tuna under the stern with the gaff and drew
it toward him keeping it clear of the coiled lines.  Holding the line
with his left shoulder again, and bracing on his left hand and arm, he
took the tuna off the gaff hook and put the gaff back in place.  He put
one knee on the fish and cut strips of dark red meat longitudinally
from the back of the head to the tail.  They were wedge-shaped strips
and he cut them from next to the back bone down to the edge of the
belly.  When he had cut six strips he spread them out on the wood of
the bow, wiped his knife on his trousers, and lifted the carcass of the
bonito by the tail and dropped it overboard.

"I don't think I can eat an entire one," he said and drew his knife
across one of the strips.  He could feel the steady hard pull of the
line and his left hand was cramped.  It drew up tight on the heavy cord
and he looked at it in disgust.

"What kind of a hand is that," he said.  "Cramp then if you want.  Make
yourself into a claw.  It will do you no good."

Come on, he thought and looked down into the dark water at the slant of
the line.  Eat it now and it will strengthen the hand.  It is not the
hand's fault and you have been many hours with the fish.  But you can
stay with him forever.  Eat the bonito now.

He picked up a piece and put it in his mouth and chewed it slowly.  It
was not unpleasant.

Chew it well, he thought, and get all the juices.  It would not be bad
to eat with a little lime or with lemon or with salt.

"How do you feel, hand?" he asked the cramped hand that was almost as
stiff as rigor mortis.  "I'll eat some more for you."


He ate the other part of the piece that he had cut in two.  He chewed
it carefully and then spat out the skin.

"How does it go, hand?  Or is it too early to know?"

He took another full piece and chewed it.

"It is a strong full-blooded fish," he thought.  "I was lucky to get
him instead of dolphin.  Dolphin is too sweet.  This is hardly sweet at
all and all the strength is still in it."

There is no sense in being anything but practical though, he thought.
I wish I had some salt.  And I do not know whether the sun will rot or
dry what is left, so I had better eat it all although I am not hungry.
The fish is calm and steady.  I will eat it all and then I will be
ready.

"Be patient, hand," he said.  "I do this for you."

I wish I could feed the fish, he thought.  He is my brother.  But I
must kill him and keep strong to do it.  Slowly and conscientiously he
ate all of the wedge-shaped strips of fish.

He straightened up, wiping his hand on his trousers.

"Now," he said.  "You can let the cord go, hand, and I will handle him
with the right arm alone until you stop that nonsense."  He put his
left foot on the heavy line that the left hand had held and lay back
against the pull against his back.

"God help me to have the cramp go," he said.  "Because I do not know
what the fish is going to do."

But he seems calm, he thought, and following his plan.  But what is his
plan, he thought.  And what is mine?  Mine I must improvise to his
because of his great size.  If he will jump I can kill him.  But he
stays down forever.  Then I will stay down with him forever.

He rubbed the cramped hand against his trousers and tried to gentle the
fingers.  But it would not open.  Maybe it will open with the sun, he
thought.  Maybe it will open when the strong raw tuna is digested.  If
I have to have it, I will open it, cost whatever it costs.  But I do
not want to open it now by force.  Let it open by itself and come back
of its own accord.  After all I abused it much in the night when it was
necessary to free and unite the various lines.

He looked across the sea and knew how alone he was now.  But he could
see the prisms in the deep dark water and the line stretching ahead and
the strange undulation of the calm.  The clouds were building up now
for the trade wind and he looked ahead and saw a flight of wild ducks
etching themselves against the sky over the water, then blurring, then
etching again and he knew no man was ever alone on the sea.

He thought of how some men feared being out of sight of land in a small
boat and knew they were right in the months of sudden bad weather.  But
now they were in hurricane months and, when there are no hurricanes,
the weather of hurricane months is the best of all the year.

If there is a hurricane you always see the signs of it in the sky for
days ahead, if you are at sea.  They do not see it ashore because they
do not know what to look for, he thought.  The land must make a
difference too, in the shape of the clouds.  But we have no hurricane
coming now.

He looked at the sky and saw the white cumulus built like friendly
piles of ice cream and high above were the thin feathers of the cirrus
against the high September sky.

"Light _brisa_," he said.  "Better weather for me than for you, fish."

His left hand was still cramped, but he was unknotting it slowly.

I hate a cramp, he thought.  It is a treachery of one's own body.  It
is humiliating before others to have a diarrhoea from ptomaine
poisoning or to vomit from it.  But a cramp, he thought of it as a
_calambre_, humiliates oneself especially when one is alone.

If the boy were here he could rub it for me and loosen it down from the
forearm, he thought.  But it will loosen up.

Then, with his right hand he felt the difference in the pull of the
line before he saw the slant change in the water.  Then, as he leaned
against the line and slapped his left hand hard and fast against his
thigh he saw the line slanting slowly upward.

"He's coming up," he said.  "Come on hand.  Please come on."

The line rose slowly and steadily and then the surface of the ocean
bulged ahead of the boat and the fish came out.  He came out unendingly
and water poured from his sides.  He was bright in the sun and his head
and back were dark purple and in the sun the stripes on his sides
showed wide and a light lavender.  His sword was as long as a baseball
bat and tapered like a rapier and he rose his full length from the
water and then re-entered it, smoothly, like a diver and the old man
saw the great scythe-blade of his tail go under and the line commenced
to race out.

"He is two feet longer than the skiff," the old man said.  The line was
going out fast but steadily and the fish was not panicked.  The old man
was trying with both hands to keep the line just inside of breaking
strength.  He knew that if he could not slow the fish with a steady
pressure the fish could take out all the line and break it.

He is a great fish and I must convince him, he thought.  I must never
let him learn his strength nor what he could do if he made his run.  If
I were him I would put in everything now and go until something broke.
But, thank God, they are not as intelligent as we who kill them;
although they are more noble and more able.

The old man had seen many great fish.  He had seen many that weighed
more than a thousand pounds and he had caught two of that size in his
life, but never alone.  Now alone, and out of sight of land, he was
fast to the biggest fish that he had ever seen and bigger than he had
ever heard of, and his left hand was still as tight as the gripped
claws of an eagle.

It will uncramp though, he thought.  Surely it will uncramp to help my
right hand.  There are three things that are brothers: the fish and my
two hands.  It must uncramp.  It is unworthy of it to be cramped.  The
fish had slowed again and was going at his usual pace.

I wonder why he jumped, the old man thought.  He jumped almost as
though to show me how big he was.  I know now, anyway, he thought.  I
wish I could show him what sort of man I am.  But then he would see the
cramped hand.  Let him think I am more man than I am and I will be so.
I wish I was the fish, he thought, with everything he has against only
my will and my intelligence.

He settled comfortably against the wood and took his suffering as it
came and the fish swam steadily and the boat moved slowly through the
dark water.  There was a small sea rising with the wind coming up from
the east and at noon the old man's left hand was uncramped.

"Bad news for you, fish," he said and shifted the line over the sacks
that covered his shoulders.

He was comfortable but suffering, although he did not admit the
suffering at all.

"I am not religious," he said.  "But I will say ten Our Fathers and ten
Hail Marys that I should catch this fish, and I promise to make a
pilgrimage to the Virgen de Cobre if I catch him.  That is a promise."

He commenced to say his prayers mechanically.  Sometimes he would be so
tired that he could not remember the prayer and then he would say them
fast so that they would come automatically.  Hail Marys are easier to
say than Our Fathers, he thought.

"Hail Mary full of Grace the Lord is with thee.  Blessed art thou among
women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.  Holy Mary, Mother
of God, pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death.  Amen."
Then he added, "Blessed Virgin, pray for the death of this fish.
Wonderful though he is."

With his prayers said, and feeling much better, but suffering exactly
as much, and perhaps a little more, he leaned against the wood of the
bow and began, mechanically, to work the fingers of his left hand.

The sun was hot now although the breeze was rising gently.

"I had better re-bait that little line out over the stern," he said.
"If the fish decides to stay another night I will need to eat again and
the water is low in the bottle.  I don't think I can get anything but a
dolphin here.  But if I eat him fresh enough he won't be bad.  I wish a
flying fish would come on board tonight.  But I have no light to
attract them.  A flying fish is excellent to eat raw and I would not
have to cut him up.  I must save all my strength now.  Christ, I did
not know he was so big."

"I'll kill him though," he said.  "In all his greatness and his glory."

Although it is unjust, he thought.  But I will show him what a man can
do and what a man endures.

"I told the boy I was a strange old man," he said.  "Now is when I must
prove it."

The thousand times that he had proved it meant nothing.  Now he was
proving it again.  Each time was a new time and he never thought about
the past when he was doing it.

I wish he'd sleep and I could sleep and dream about the lions, he
thought.  Why are the lions the main thing that is left?  Don't think,
old man, he said to himself.  Rest gently now against the wood and
think of nothing.  He is working.  Work as little as you can.

It was getting into the afternoon and the boat still moved slowly and
steadily.  But there was an added drag now from the easterly breeze and
the old man rode gently with the small sea and the hurt of the cord
across his back came to him easily and smoothly.

Once in the afternoon the line started to rise again.  But the fish
only continued to swim at a slightly higher level.  The sun was on the
old man's left arm and shoulder and on his back.  So he knew the fish
had turned east of north.

Now that he had seen him once, he could picture the fish swimming in
the water with his purple pectoral fins set wide as wings and the great
erect tail slicing through the dark.  I wonder how much he sees at that
depth, the old man thought.  His eye is huge and a horse, with much
less eye, can see in the dark.  Once I could see quite well in the
dark.  Not in the absolute dark.  But almost as a cat sees.

The sun and his steady movement of his fingers had uncramped his left
hand now completely and he began to shift more of the strain to it and
he shrugged the muscles of his back to shift the hurt of the cord a
little.

"If you're not tired, fish," he said aloud, "you must be very strange."

He felt very tired now and he knew the night would come soon and he
tried to think of other things.  He thought of the Big Leagues, to him
they were the _Gran Ligas_, and he knew that the Yankees of New York
were playing the _Tigres_ of Detroit.

This is the second day now that I do not know the result of the
_juegos_, he thought.  But I must have confidence and I must be worthy
of the great DiMaggio who does all things perfectly even with the pain
of the bone spur in his heel.  What is a bone spur? he asked himself.
_Un espuela de hueso_.  We do not have them.  Can it be as painful as
the spur of a fighting cock in one's heel?  I do not think I could
endure that or the loss of the eye and of both eyes and continue to
fight as the fighting cocks do.  Man is not much beside the great birds
and beasts.  Still I would rather be that beast down there in the
darkness of the sea.

"Unless sharks come," he said aloud.  "If sharks come, God pity him and
me."

Do you believe the great DiMaggio would stay with a fish as long as I
will stay with this one? he thought.  I am sure he would and more since
he is young and strong.  Also his father was a fisherman.  But would
the bone spur hurt him too much?

"I do not know," he said aloud.  "I never had a bone spur."

As the sun set he remembered, to give himself more confidence, the time
in the tavern at Casablanca when he had played the hand game with the
great negro from Cienfuegos who was the strongest man on the docks.
They had gone one day and one night with their elbows on a chalk line
on the table and their forearms straight up and their hands gripped
tight.  Each one was trying to force the other's hand down onto the
table.  There was much betting and people went in and out of the room
under the kerosene lights and he had looked at the arm and hand of the
negro and at the negro's face.  They changed the referees every four
hours after the first eight so that the referees could sleep.  Blood
came out from under the fingernails of both his and the negro's hands
and they looked each other in the eye and at their hands and forearms
and the bettors went in and out of the room and sat on high chairs
against the wall and watched.  The walls were painted bright blue and
were of wood and the lamps threw their shadows against them.  The
negro's shadow was huge and it moved on the wall as the breeze moved
the lamps.

The odds would change back and forth all night and they fed the negro
rum and lighted cigarettes for him.  Then the negro, after the rum,
would try for a tremendous effort and once he had the old man, who was
not an old man then but was Santiago El Campeon, nearly three inches
off balance.  But the old man had raised his hand up to dead even
again.  He was sure then that he had the negro, who was a fine man and
a great athlete, beaten.  And at daylight when the bettors were asking
that it be called a draw and the referee was shaking his head, he had
unleashed his effort and forced the hand of the negro down and down
until it rested on the wood.  The match had started on a Sunday morning
and ended on a Monday morning.  Many of the bettors had asked for a
draw because they had to go to work on the docks loading sacks of sugar
or at the Havana Coal Company.  Otherwise everyone would have wanted it
to go to a finish.  But he had finished it anyway and before anyone had
to go to work.

For a long time after that everyone had called him The Champion and
there had been a return match in the spring.  But not much money was
bet and he had won it quite easily since he had broken the confidence
of the negro from Cienfuegos in the first match.  After that he had a
few matches and then no more.  He decided that he could beat anyone if
he wanted to badly enough and he decided that it was bad for his right
hand for fishing.  He had tried a few practice matches with his left
hand.  But his left hand had always been a traitor and would not do
what he called on it to do and he did not trust it.

The sun will bake it out well now, he thought.  It should not cramp on
me again unless it gets too cold in the night.  I wonder what this
night will bring.

An airplane passed over head on its course to Miami and he watched its
shadow scaring up the schools of flying fish.

"With so much flying fish there should be dolphin," he said, and leaned
back on the line to see if it was possible to gain any on his fish.
But he could not and it stayed at the hardness and water-drop shivering
that preceded breaking.  The boat moved ahead slowly and he watched the
airplane until he could no longer see it.

It must be very strange in an airplane, he thought.  I wonder what the
sea looks like from that height?  They should be able to see the fish
well if they do not fly too high.  I would like to fly very slowly at
two hundred fathoms high and see the fish from above.  In the turtle
boats I was in the cross-trees of the mast-head and even at that height
I saw much.  The dolphin look greener from there and you can see their
stripes and their purple spots and you can see all of the school as
they swim.  Why is it that all the fast-moving fish of the dark current
have purple backs and usually purple stripes or spots?  The dolphin
looks green of course because he is really golden.  But when he comes
to feed, truly hungry, purple stripes show on his sides as on a marlin.
Can it be anger, or the greater speed he makes that brings them out?

Just before it was dark, as they passed a great island of Sargasso weed
that heaved and swung in the light sea as though the ocean were making
love with something under a yellow blanket, his small line was taken by
a dolphin.  He saw it first when it jumped in the air, true gold in the
last of the sun and bending and flapping wildly in the air.  It jumped
again and again in the acrobatics of its fear and he worked his way
back to the stern and crouching and holding the big line with his right
hand and arm, he pulled the dolphin in with his left hand, stepping on
the gained line each time with his bare left foot.  When the fish was
at the stern, plunging and cutting from side to side in desperation,
the old man leaned over the stern and lifted the burnished gold fish
with its purple spots over the stern.  Its jaws were working
convulsively in quick bites against the hook and it pounded the bottom
of the skiff with its long flat body, its tail and its head until he
clubbed it across the shining golden head until it shivered and was
still.

The old man unhooked the fish, rebaited the line with another sardine
and tossed it over.  Then he worked his way slowly back to the bow.  He
washed his left hand and wiped it on his trousers.  Then he shifted the
heavy line from his right hand to his left and washed his right hand in
the sea while he watched the sun go into the ocean and the slant of the
big cord.

"He hasn't changed at all," he said.  But watching the movement of the
water against his hand he noted that it was perceptibly slower.

"I'll lash the two oars together across the stern and that will slow
him in the night," he said.  "He's good for the night and so am I."

It would be better to gut the dolphin a little later to save the blood
in the meat, he thought.  I can do that a little later and lash the
oars to make a drag at the same time.  I had better keep the fish quiet
now and not disturb him too much at sunset.  The setting of the sun is
a difficult time for all fish.

He let his hand dry in the air then grasped the line with it and eased
himself as much as he could and allowed himself to be pulled forward
against the wood so that the boat took the strain as much, or more,
than he did.

I'm learning how to do it, he thought.  This part of it anyway.  Then
too, remember he hasn't eaten since he took the bait and he is huge and
needs much food.  I have eaten the whole bonito.  Tomorrow I will eat
the dolphin.  He called it _dorado_.  Perhaps I should eat some of it
when I clean it.  It will be harder to eat than the bonito.  But, then,
nothing is easy.

"How do you feel, fish?" he asked aloud.  "I feel good and my left hand
is better and I have food for a night and a day.  Pull the boat, fish."

He did not truly feel good because the pain from the cord across his
back had almost passed pain and gone into a dullness that he
mistrusted.  But I have had worse things than that, he thought.  My
hand is only cut a little and the cramp is gone from the other.  My
legs are all right.  Also now I have gained on him in the question of
sustenance.

It was dark now as it becomes dark quickly after the sun sets in
September.  He lay against the worn wood of the bow and rested all that
he could.  The first stars were out.  He did not know the name of Rigel
but he saw it and knew soon they would all be out and he would have all
his distant friends.

"The fish is my friend too," he said aloud.  "I have never seen or
heard of such a fish.  But I must kill him.  I am glad we do not have
to try to kill the stars."

Imagine if each day a man must try to kill the moon, he thought.  The
moon runs away.  But imagine if a man each day should have to try to
kill the sun?  We were born lucky, he thought.

Then he was sorry for the great fish that had nothing to eat and his
determination to kill him never relaxed in his sorrow for him.  How
many people will he feed, he thought.  But are they worthy to eat him?
No, of course not.  There is no one worthy of eating him from the
manner of his behaviour and his great dignity.

I do not understand these things, he thought.  But it is good that we
do not have to try to kill the sun or the moon or the stars.  It is
enough to live on the sea and kill our true brothers.

Now, he thought, I must think about the drag.  It has its perils and
its merits.  I may lose so much line that I will lose him, if he makes
his effort and the drag made by the oars is in place and the boat loses
all her lightness.  Her lightness prolongs both our suffering but it is
my safety since he has great speed that he has never yet employed.  No
matter what passes I must gut the dolphin so he does not spoil and eat
some of him to be strong.

Now I will rest an hour more and feel that he is solid and steady
before I move back to the stern to do the work and make the decision.
In the meantime I can see how he acts and if he shows any changes.  The
oars are a good trick; but it has reached the time to play for safety.
He is much fish still and I saw that the hook was in the corner of his
mouth and he has kept his mouth tight shut.  The punishment of the hook
is nothing.  The punishment of hunger, and that he is against something
that he does not comprehend, is everything.  Rest now, old man, and let
him work until your next duty comes.

He rested for what he believed to be two hours.  The moon did not rise
now until late and he had no way of judging the time.  Nor was he
really resting except comparatively.  He was still bearing the pull of
the fish across his shoulders but he placed his left hand on the
gunwale of the bow and confided more and more of the resistance to the
fish to the skiff itself.

How simple it would be if I could make the line fast, he thought.  But
with one small lurch he could break it.  I must cushion the pull of the
line with my body and at all times be ready to give line with both
hands.

"But you have not slept yet, old man," he said aloud.  "It is half a
day and a night and now another day and you have not slept.  You must
devise a way so that you sleep a little if he is quiet and steady.  If
you do not sleep you might become unclear in the head."

I'm clear enough in the head, he thought.  Too clear.  I am as clear as
the stars that are my brothers.  Still I must sleep.  They sleep and
the moon and the sun sleep and even the ocean sleeps sometimes on
certain days when there is no current and a flat calm.

But remember to sleep, he thought.  Make yourself do it and devise some
simple and sure way about the lines.  Now go back and prepare the
dolphin.  It is too dangerous to rig the oars as a drag if you must
sleep.

I could go without sleeping, he told himself.  But it would be too
dangerous.

He started to work his way back to the stern on his hands and knees,
being careful not to jerk against the fish.  He may be half asleep
himself, he thought.  But I do not want him to rest.  He must pull
until he dies.

Back in the stern he turned so that his left hand held the strain of
the line across his shoulders and drew his knife from its sheath with
his right hand.  The stars were bright now and he saw the dolphin
clearly and he pushed the blade of his knife into his head and drew him

out from under the stern.  He put one of his feet on the fish and slit
him quickly from the vent up to the tip of his lower jaw.  Then he put
his knife down and gutted him with his right hand, scooping him clean
and pulling the gills clear.  He felt the maw heavy and slippery in his
hands and he slit it open.  There were two flying fish inside.  They
were fresh and hard and he laid them side by side and dropped the guts
and the gills over the stern.  They sank leaving a trail of
phosphorescence in the water.  The dolphin was cold and a leprous
gray-white now in the starlight and the old man skinned one side of him
while he held his right foot on the fish's head.  Then he turned him
over and skinned the other side and cut each side off from the head
down to the tail.

He slid the carcass overboard and looked to see if there was any swirl
in the water.  But there was only the light of its slow descent.  He
turned then and placed the two flying fish inside the two fillets of
fish and putting his knife back in its sheath, he worked his way slowly
back to the bow.  His back was bent with the weight of the line across
it and he carried the fish in his right hand.

Back in the bow he laid the two fillets of fish out on the wood with
the flying fish beside them.  After that he settled the line across his
shoulders in a new place and held it again with his left hand resting
on the gunwale.  Then he leaned over the side and washed the flying
fish in the water, noting the speed of the water against his hand.  His
hand was phosphorescent from skinning the fish and he watched the flow
of the water against it.  The flow was less strong and as he rubbed the
side of his hand against the planking of the skiff, particles of
phosphorus floated off and drifted slowly astern.

"He is tiring or he is resting," the old man said.  "Now let me get
through the eating of this dolphin and get some rest and a little
sleep."

Under the stars and with the night colder all the time he ate half of
one of the dolphin fillets and one of the flying fish, gutted and with
its head cut off.

"What an excellent fish dolphin is to eat cooked," he said.  "And what
a miserable fish raw.  I will never go in a boat again without salt or
limes."

If I had brains I would have splashed water on the bow all day and
drying, it would have made salt, he thought.  But then I did not hook
the dolphin until almost sunset.  Still it was a lack of preparation.
But I have chewed it all well and I am not nauseated.

The sky was clouding over to the east and one after another the stars
he knew were gone.  It looked now as though he were moving into a great
canyon of clouds and the wind had dropped.

"There will be bad weather in three or four days," he said.  "But not
tonight and not tomorrow.  Rig now to get some sleep, old man, while
the fish is calm and steady."

He held the line tight in his right hand and then pushed his thigh
against his right hand as he leaned all his weight against the wood of
the bow.  Then he passed the line a little lower on his shoulders and
braced his left hand on it.

My right hand can hold it as long as it is braced, he thought.  If it
relaxes in sleep my left hand will wake me as the line goes out.  It is
hard on the right hand.  But he is used to punishment.  Even if I sleep
twenty minutes or a half an hour it is good.  He lay forward cramping
himself against the line with all of his body, putting all his weight
onto his right hand, and he was asleep.

He did not dream of the lions but instead of a vast school of porpoises
that stretched for eight or ten miles and it was in the time of their
mating and they would leap high into the air and return into the same
hole they had made in the water when they leaped.

Then he dreamed that he was in the village on his bed and there was a
norther and he was very cold and his right arm was asleep because his
head had rested on it instead of a pillow.

After that he began to dream of the long yellow beach and he saw the
first of the lions come down onto it in the early dark and then the
other lions came and he rested his chin on the wood of the bows where
the ship lay anchored with the evening off-shore breeze and he waited
to see if there would be more lions and he was happy.

The moon had been up for a long time but he slept on and the fish
pulled on steadily and the boat moved into the tunnel of clouds.

He woke with the jerk of his right fist coming up against his face and
the line burning out through his right hand.  He had no feeling of his
left hand but he braked all he could with his right and the line rushed
out.  Finally his left hand found the line and he leaned back against
the line and now it burned his back and his left hand, and his left
hand was taking all the strain and cutting badly.  He looked back at
the coils of line and they were feeding smoothly.  Just then the fish
jumped making a great bursting of the ocean and then a heavy fall.
Then he jumped again and again and the boat was going fast although
line was still racing out and the old man was raising the strain to
breaking point and raising it to breaking point again and again.  He
had been pulled down tight onto the bow and his face was in the cut
slice of dolphin and he could not move.

This is what we waited for, he thought.  So now let us take it.

Make him pay for the line, he thought.  Make him pay for it.

He could not see the fish's jumps but only heard the breaking of the
ocean and the heavy splash as he fell.  The speed of the line was
cutting his hands badly but he had always known this would happen and
he tried to keep the cutting across the calloused parts and not let the
line slip into the palm nor cut the fingers.

If the boy was here he would wet the coils of line, he thought.  Yes.
If the boy were here.  If the boy were here.

The line went out and out and out but it was slowing now and he was
making the fish earn each inch of it.  Now he got his head up from the
wood and out of the slice of fish that his cheek had crushed.  Then he
was on his knees and then he rose slowly to his feet.  He was ceding
line but more slowly all the time.  He worked back to where he could
feel with his foot the coils of line that he could not see.  There was
plenty of line still and now the fish had to pull the friction of all
that new line through the water.

Yes, he thought.  And now he has jumped more than a dozen times and
filled the sacks along his back with air and he cannot go down deep to
die where I cannot bring him up.  He will start circling soon and then
I must work on him.  I wonder what started him so suddenly?  Could it
have been hunger that made him desperate, or was he frightened by
something in the night?  Maybe he suddenly felt fear.  But he was such
a calm, strong fish and he seemed so fearless and so confident.  It is
strange.

"You better be fearless and confident yourself, old man," he said.
"You're holding him again but you cannot get line.  But soon he has to
circle."

The old man held him with his left hand and his shoulders now and
stooped down and scooped up water in his right hand to get the crushed
dolphin flesh off of his face.  He was afraid that it might nauseate
him and he would vomit and lose his strength.  When his face was
cleaned he washed his right hand in the water over the side and then
let it stay in the salt water while he watched the first light come
before the sunrise.  He's headed almost east, he thought.  That means
he is tired and going with the current.  Soon he will have to circle.
Then our true work begins.

After he judged that his right hand had been in the water long enough
he took it out and looked at it.  "It is not bad," he said.  "And pain
does not matter to a man."

He took hold of the line carefully so that it did not fit into any of
the fresh line cuts and shifted his weight so that he could put his
left hand into the sea on the other side of the skiff.

"You did not do so badly for something worthless," he said to his left
hand.  "But there was a moment when I could not find you."

Why was I not born with two good hands? he thought.  Perhaps it was my
fault in not training that one properly.  But God knows he has had
enough chances to learn.  He did not do so badly in the night, though,
and he has only cramped once.  If he cramps again let the line cut him
off.

When he thought that he knew that he was not being clear-headed and he
thought he should chew some more of the dolphin.  But I can't, he told
himself.  It is better to be light-headed than to lose your strength
from nausea.  And I know I cannot keep it if I eat it since my face was
in it.  I will keep it for an emergency until it goes bad.  But it is
too late to try for strength now through nourishment.  You're stupid,
he told himself.  Eat the other flying fish.

It was there, cleaned and ready, and he picked it up with his left hand
and ate it chewing the bones carefully and eating all of it down to the
tail.

It has more nourishment than almost any fish, he thought.  At least the
kind of strength that I need.  Now I have done what I can, he thought.
Let him begin to circle and let the fight come.

The sun was rising for the third time since he had put to sea when the
fish started to circle.

He could not see by the slant of the line that the fish was circling.
It was too early for that.  He just felt a faint slackening of the
pressure of the line and he commenced to pull on it gently with his
right hand.  It tightened, as always, but just when he reached the
point where it would break, line began to come in.  He slipped his
shoulders and head from under the line and began to pull in line
steadily and gently.  He used both of his hands in a swinging motion
and tried to do the pulling as much as he could with his body and his
legs.  His old legs and shoulders pivoted with the swinging of the
pulling.

"It is a very big circle," he said.  "But he is circling."

Then the line would not come in any more and he held it until he saw
the drops jumping from it in the sun.  Then it started out and the old
man knelt down and let it go grudgingly back into the dark water.

"He is making the far part of his circle now," he said.  I must hold
all I can, he thought.  The strain will shorten his circle each time.
Perhaps in an hour I will see him.  Now I must convince him and then I
must kill him.

But the fish kept on circling slowly and the old man was wet with sweat
and tired deep into his bones two hours later.  But the circles were
much shorter now and from the way the line slanted he could tell the
fish had risen steadily while he swam.

For an hour the old man had been seeing black spots before his eyes and
the sweat salted his eyes and salted the cut over his eye and on his
forehead.  He was not afraid of the black spots.  They were normal at
the tension that he was pulling on the line.  Twice, though, he had
felt faint and dizzy and that had worried him.

"I could not fail myself and die on a fish like this," he said.  "Now
that I have him coming so beautifully, God help me endure.  I'll say a
hundred Our Fathers and a hundred Hail Marys.  But I cannot say them
now."

Consider them said, he thought.  I'll say them later.

Just then he felt a sudden banging and jerking on the line he held with
his two hands.  It was sharp and hard-feeling and heavy.

He is hitting the wire leader with his spear, he thought.  That was
bound to come.  He had to do that.  It may make him jump though and I
would rather he stayed circling now.  The jumps were necessary for him
to take air.  But after that each one can widen the opening of the hook
wound and he can throw the hook.

"Don't jump, fish," he said.  "Don't jump."

The fish hit the wire several times more and each time he shook his
head the old man gave up a little line.

I must hold his pain where it is, he thought.  Mine does not matter.  I
can control mine.  But his pain could drive him mad.

After a while the fish stopped beating at the wire and started circling
slowly again.  The old man was gaining line steadily now.  But he felt
faint again.  He lifted some sea water with his left hand and put it on
his head.  Then he put more on and rubbed the back of his neck.

"I have no cramps," he said.  "He'll be up soon and I can last.  You
have to last.  Don't even speak of it."

He kneeled against the bow and, for a moment, slipped the line over his
back again.  I'll rest now while he goes out on the circle and then
stand up and work on him when he comes in, he decided.

It was a great temptation to rest in the bow and let the fish make one
circle by himself without recovering any line.  But when the strain
showed the fish had turned to come toward the boat, the old man rose to
his feet and started the pivoting and the weaving pulling that brought
in all the line he gained.

I'm tireder than I have ever been, he thought, and now the trade wind
is rising.  But that will be good to take him in with.  I need that
badly.

"I'll rest on the next turn as he goes out," he said.  "I feel much
better.  Then in two or three turns more I will have him."

His straw hat was far on the back of his head and he sank down into the
bow with the pull of the line as he felt the fish turn.

You work now, fish, he thought.  I'll take you at the turn.

The sea had risen considerably.  But it was a fair-weather breeze and
he had to have it to get home.

"I'll just steer south and west," he said.  "A man is never lost at sea
and it is a long island."

It was on the third turn that he saw the fish first.

He saw him first as a dark shadow that took so long to pass under the
boat that he could not believe its length.

"No," he said.  "He can't be that big."

But he was that big and at the end of this circle he came to the
surface only thirty yards away and the man saw his tail out of water.
It was higher than a big scythe blade and a very pale lavender above
the dark blue water.  It raked back and as the fish swam just below the
surface the old man could see his huge bulk and the purple stripes that
banded him.  His dorsal fin was down and his huge pectorals were spread
wide.

On this circle the old man could see the fish's eye and the two gray
sucking fish that swam around him.  Sometimes they attached themselves
to him.  Sometimes they darted off.  Sometimes they would swim easily
in his shadow.  They were each over three feet long and when they swam
fast they lashed their whole bodies like eels.

The old man was sweating now but from something else besides the sun.
On each calm placid turn the fish made he was gaining line and he was
sure that in two turns more he would have a chance to get the harpoon
in.

But I must get him close, close, close, he thought.  I mustn't try for
the head.  I must get the heart.

"Be calm and strong, old man," he said.

On the next circle the fish's back was out but he was a little too far
from the boat.  On the next circle he was still too far away but he was
higher out of water and the old man was sure that by gaining some more
line he could have him alongside.

He had rigged his harpoon long before and its coil of light rope was in
a round basket and the end was made fast to the bitt in the bow.

The fish was coming in on his circle now calm and beautiful looking and
only his great tail moving.  The old man pulled on him all that he
could to bring him closer.  For just a moment the fish turned a little
on his side.  Then he straightened himself and began another circle.

"I moved him," the old man said.  "I moved him then."

He felt faint again now but he held on the great fish all the strain
that he could.  I moved him, he thought.  Maybe this time I can get him
over.  Pull, hands, he thought.  Hold up, legs.  Last for me, head.
Last for me.  You never went.  This time I'll pull him over.

But when he put all of his effort on, starting it well out before the
fish came alongside and pulling with all his strength, the fish pulled
part way over and then righted himself and swam away.

"Fish," the old man said.  "Fish, you are going to have to die anyway.
Do you have to kill me too?"

That way nothing is accomplished, he thought.  His mouth was too dry to
speak but he could not reach for the water now.  I must get him
alongside this time, he thought.  I am not good for many more turns.
Yes you are, he told himself.  You're good for ever.

On the next turn, he nearly had him.  But again the fish righted
himself and swam slowly away.

You are killing me, fish, the old man thought.  But you have a right
to.  Never have I seen a greater, or more beautiful, or a calmer or
more noble thing than you, brother.  Come on and kill me.  I do not
care who kills who.

Now you are getting confused in the head, he thought.  You must keep
your head clear.  Keep your head clear and know how to suffer like a
man.  Or a fish, he thought.

"Clear up, head," he said in a voice he could hardly hear.  "Clear up."

Twice more it was the same on the turns.

I do not know, the old man thought.  He had been on the point of
feeling himself go each time.  I do not know.  But I will try it once
more.

He tried it once more and he felt himself going when he turned the
fish.  The fish righted himself and swam off again slowly with the
great tail weaving in the air.

I'll try it again, the old man promised, although his hands were mushy
now and he could only see well in flashes.

He tried it again and it was the same.  So, he thought, and he felt
himself going before he started; I will try it once again.

He took all his pain and what was left of his strength and his long
gone pride and he put it against the fish's agony and the fish came
over onto his side and swam gently on his side, his bill almost
touching the planking of the skiff and started to pass the boat, long,
deep, wide, silver and barred with purple and interminable in the water.

The old man dropped the line and put his foot on it and lifted the
harpoon as high as he could and drove it down with all his strength,
and more strength he had just summoned, into the fish's side just
behind the great chest fin that rose high in the air to the altitude of
the man's chest.  He felt the iron go in and he leaned on it and drove
it further and then pushed all his weight after it.

Then the fish came alive, with his death in him, and rose high out of
the water showing all his great length and width and all his power and
his beauty.  He seemed to hang in the air above the old man in the
skiff.  Then he fell into the water with a crash that sent spray over
the old man and over all of the skiff.

The old man felt faint and sick and he could not see well.  But he
cleared the harpoon line and let it run slowly through his raw hands
and, when he could see, he saw the fish was on his back with his silver
belly up.  The shaft of the harpoon was projecting at an angle from the
fish's shoulder and the sea was discolouring with the red of the blood
from his heart.  First it was dark as a shoal in the blue water that
was more than a mile deep.  Then it spread like a cloud.  The fish was
silvery and still and floated with the waves.

The old man looked carefully in the glimpse of vision that he had.
Then he took two turns of the harpoon line around the bitt in the bow
and laid his head on his hands.

"Keep my head clear," he said against the wood of the bow.  "I am a
tired old man.  But I have killed this fish which is my brother and now
I must do the slave work."

Now I must prepare the nooses and the rope to lash him alongside, he
thought.  Even if we were two and swamped her to load him and bailed
her out, this skiff would never hold him.  I must prepare everything,
then bring him in and lash him well and step the mast and set sail for
home.

He started to pull the fish in to have him alongside so that he could
pass a line through his gills and out his mouth and make his head fast
alongside the bow.  I want to see him, he thought, and to touch and to
feel him.  He is my fortune, he thought.  But that is not why I wish to
feel him.  I think I felt his heart, he thought.  When I pushed on the
harpoon shaft the second time.  Bring him in now and make him fast and
get the noose around his tail and another around his middle to bind him
to the skiff.

"Get to work, old man," he said.  He took a very small drink of the
water.  "There is very much slave work to be done now that the fight is
over."

He looked up at the sky and then out to his fish.  He looked at the sun
carefully.  It is not much more than noon, he thought.  And the trade
wind is rising.  The lines all mean nothing now.  The boy and I will
splice them when we are home.

"Come on, fish," he said.  But the fish did not come.  Instead he lay
there wallowing now in the seas and the old man pulled the skiff up
onto him.

When he was even with him and had the fish's head against the bow he
could not believe his size.  But he untied the harpoon rope from the
bitt, passed it through the fish's gills and out his jaws, made a turn
around his sword then passed the rope through the other gill, made
another turn around the bill and knotted the double rope and made it
fast to the bitt in the bow.  He cut the rope then and went astern to
noose the tail.  The fish had turned silver from his original purple
and silver, and the stripes showed the same pale violet colour as his
tail.  They were wider than a man's hand with his fingers spread and
the fish's eye looked as detached as the mirrors in a periscope or as a
saint in a procession.

"It was the only way to kill him," the old man said.  He was feeling
better since the water and he knew he would not go away and his head
was clear.  He's over fifteen hundred pounds the way he is, he thought.
Maybe much more.  If he dresses out two-thirds of that at thirty cents
a pound?

"I need a pencil for that," he said.  "My head is not that clear.  But
I think the great DiMaggio would be proud of me today.  I had no bone
spurs.  But the hands and the back hurt truly."  I wonder what a bone
spur is, he thought.  Maybe we have them without knowing of it.

He made the fish fast to bow and stern and to the middle thwart.  He
was so big it was like lashing a much bigger skiff alongside.  He cut a
piece of line and tied the fish's lower jaw against his bill so his
mouth would not open and they would sail as cleanly as possible.  Then
he stepped the mast and, with the stick that was his gaff and with his
boom rigged, the patched sail drew, the boat began to move, and half
lying in the stern he sailed south-west.

He did not need a compass to tell him where south-west was.  He only
needed the feel of the trade wind and the drawing of the sail.  I
better put a small line out with a spoon on it and try and get
something to eat and drink for the moisture.  But he could not find a
spoon and his sardines were rotten.  So he hooked a patch of yellow
gulf weed with the gaff as they passed and shook it so that the small
shrimps that were in it fell onto the planking of the skiff.  There
were more than a dozen of them and they jumped and kicked like sand
fleas.  The old man pinched their heads off with his thumb and
forefinger and ate them chewing up the shells and the tails.  They were
very tiny but he knew they were nourishing and they tasted good.

The old man still had two drinks of water in the bottle and he used
half of one after he had eaten the shrimps.  The skiff was sailing well
considering the handicaps and he steered with the tiller under his arm.
He could see the fish and he had only to look at his hands and feel his
back against the stern to know that this had truly happened and was not
a dream.  At one time when he was feeling so badly toward the end, he
had thought perhaps it was a dream.  Then when he had seen the fish
come out of the water and hang motionless in the sky before he fell, he
was sure there was some great strangeness and he could not believe it.
Then he could not see well, although now he saw as well as ever.

Now he knew there was the fish and his hands and back were no dream.
The hands cure quickly, he thought.  I bled them clean and the salt
water will heal them.  The dark water of the true gulf is the greatest
healer that there is.  All I must do is keep the head clear.  The hands
have done their work and we sail well.  With his mouth shut and his
tail straight up and down we sail like brothers.  Then his head started
to become a little unclear and he thought, is he bringing me in or am I
bringing him in?  If I were towing him behind there would be no
question.  Nor if the fish were in the skiff, with all dignity gone,
there would be no question either.  But they were sailing together
lashed side by side and the old man thought, let him bring me in if it
pleases him.  I am only better than him through trickery and he meant
me no harm.

They sailed well and the old man soaked his hands in the salt water and
tried to keep his head clear.  There were high cumulus clouds and
enough cirrus above them so that the old man knew the breeze would last
all night.  The old man looked at the fish constantly to make sure it
was true.  It was an hour before the first shark hit him.

The shark was not an accident.  He had come up from deep down in the
water as the dark cloud of blood had settled and dispersed in the mile
deep sea.  He had come up so fast and absolutely without caution that
he broke the surface of the blue water and was in the sun.  Then he
fell back into the sea and picked up the scent and started swimming on
the course the skiff and the fish had taken.

Sometimes he lost the scent.  But he would pick it up again, or have
just a trace of it, and he swam fast and hard on the course.  He was a
very big Mako shark built to swim as fast as the fastest fish in the
sea and everything about him was beautiful except his jaws.

His back was as blue as a sword fish's and his belly was silver and his
hide was smooth and handsome.  He was built as a sword fish except for
his huge jaws which were tight shut now as he swam fast, just under the
surface with his high dorsal fin knifing through the water without
wavering.  Inside the closed double lip of his jaws all of his eight
rows of teeth were slanted inwards.  They were not the ordinary
pyramid-shaped teeth of most sharks.  They were shaped like a man's
fingers when they are crisped like claws.  They were nearly as long as
the fingers of the old man and they had razor-sharp cutting edges on
both sides.  This was a fish built to feed on all the fishes in the
sea, that were so fast and strong and well armed that they had no other
enemy.  Now he speeded up as he smelled the fresher scent and his blue
dorsal fin cut the water.

When the old man saw him coming he knew that this was a shark that had
no fear at all and would do exactly what he wished.  He prepared the
harpoon and made the rope fast while he watched the shark come on.  The
rope was short as it lacked what he had cut away to lash the fish.

The old man's head was clear and good now and he was full of resolution
but he had little hope.  It was too good to last, he thought.  He took
one look at the great fish as he watched the shark close in.  It might
as well have been a dream, he thought.  I cannot keep him from hitting
me but maybe I can get him.  _Dentuso_, he thought.  Bad luck to your
mother.

The shark closed fast astern and when he hit the fish the old man saw
his mouth open and his strange eyes and the clicking chop of the teeth
as he drove forward in the meat just above the tail.  The shark's head
was out of water and his back was coming out and the old man could hear
the noise of skin and flesh ripping on the big fish when he rammed the
harpoon down onto the shark's head at a spot where the line between his
eyes intersected with the line that ran straight back from his nose.
There were no such lines.  There was only the heavy sharp blue head and
the big eyes and the clicking, thrusting all-swallowing jaws.  But that
was the location of the brain and the old man hit it.  He hit it with
his blood mushed hands driving a good harpoon with all his strength.
He hit it without hope but with resolution and complete malignancy.

The shark swung over and the old man saw his eye was not alive and then
he swung over once again, wrapping himself in two loops of the rope.
The old man knew that he was dead but the shark would not accept it.
Then, on his back, with his tail lashing and his jaws clicking, the
shark plowed over the water as a speed-boat does.  The water was white
where his tail beat it and three-quarters of his body was clear above
the water when the rope came taut, shivered, and then snapped.  The
shark lay quietly for a little while on the surface and the old man
watched him.  Then he went down very slowly.

"He took about forty pounds," the old man said aloud.  He took my
harpoon too and all the rope, he thought, and now my fish bleeds again
and there will be others.

He did not like to look at the fish anymore since he had been
mutilated.  When the fish had been hit it was as though he himself were
hit.

But I killed the shark that hit my fish, he thought.  And he was the
biggest _dentuso_ that I have ever seen.  And God knows that I have
seen big ones.

It was too good to last, he thought.  I wish it had been a dream now
and that I had never hooked the fish and was alone in bed on the
newspapers.

"But man is not made for defeat," he said.  "A man can be destroyed but
not defeated."  I am sorry that I killed the fish though, he thought.
Now the bad time is coming and I do not even have the harpoon.  The
_dentuso_ is cruel and able and strong and intelligent.  But I was more
intelligent that he was.  Perhaps not, he thought.  Perhaps I was only
better armed.

"Don't think, old man," he said aloud.  "Sail on this course and take
it when it comes."

But I must think, he thought.  Because it is all I have left.  That and
baseball.  I wonder how the great DiMaggio would have liked the way I
hit him in the brain?  It was no great thing, he thought.  Any man
could do it.  But do you think my hands were as great a handicap as the
bone spurs?  I cannot know.  I never had anything wrong with my heel
except the time the sting ray stung it when I stepped on him when
swimming and paralyzed the lower leg and made the unbearable pain.

"Think about something cheerful, old man," he said.  "Every minute now
you are closer to home.  You sail lighter for the loss of forty pounds."

He knew quite well the pattern of what could happen when he reached the
inner part of the current.  But there was nothing to be done now.

"Yes there is," he said aloud.  "I can lash my knife to the butt of one
of the oars."

So he did that with the tiller under his arm and the sheet of the sail
under his foot.

"Now," he said.  "I am still an old man.  But I am not unarmed."

The breeze was fresh now and he sailed on well.  He watched only the
forward part of the fish and some of his hope returned.

It is silly not to hope, he thought.  Besides I believe it is a sin.
Do not think about sin, he thought.  There are enough problems now
without sin.  Also I have no understanding of it.

I have no understanding of it and I am not sure that I believe in it.
Perhaps it was a sin to kill the fish.  I suppose it was even though I
did it to keep me alive and feed many people.  But then everything is a
sin.  Do not think about sin.  It is much too late for that and there
are people who are paid to do it.  Let them think about it.  You were
born to be a fisherman as the fish was born to be a fish.  San Pedro
was a fisherman as was the father of the great DiMaggio.

But he liked to think about all things that he was involved in and
since there was nothing to read and he did not have a radio, he thought
much and he kept on thinking about sin.  You did not kill the fish only
to keep alive and to sell for food, he thought.  You killed him for
pride and because you are a fisherman.  You loved him when he was alive
and you loved him after.  It you love him, it is not a sin to kill him.
Or is it more?

"You think too much, old man," he said aloud.

But you enjoyed killing the _dentuso_, he thought.  He lives on the
live fish as you do.  He is not a scavenger nor just a moving appetite
as some sharks are.  He is beautiful and noble and knows no fear of
anything.

"I killed him in self-defense," the old man said aloud.  "And I killed
him well."

Besides, he thought, everything kills everything else in some way.
Fishing kills me exactly as it keeps me alive.  The boy keeps me alive,
he thought.  I must not deceive myself too much.

He leaned over the side and pulled loose a piece of the meat of the
fish where the shark had cut him.  He chewed it and noted its quality
and its good taste.  It was firm and juicy, like meat, but it was not
red.  There was no stringiness in it and he knew that it would bring
the highest price in the market.  But there was no way to keep its
scent out of the water and the old man knew that a very bad time was
coming.

The breeze was steady.  It had backed a little further into the
north-east and he knew that meant that it would not fall off.  The old
man looked ahead of him but he could see no sails nor could he see the
hull nor the smoke of any ship.  There were only the flying fish that
went up from his bow sailing away to either side and the yellow patches
of gulf-weed.  He could not even see a bird.

He had sailed for two hours, resting in the stern and sometimes chewing
a bit of the meat from the marlin, trying to rest and to be strong,
when he saw the first of the two sharks.

"_Ay_," he said aloud.  There is no translation for this word and
perhaps it is just a noise such as a man might make, involuntarily,
feeling the nail go through his hands and into the wood.

"_Galanos_," he said aloud.  He had seen the second fin now coming up
behind the first and had identified them as shovel-nosed sharks by the
brown, triangular fin and the sweeping movements of the tail.  They had
the scent and were excited and in the stupidity of their great hunger
they were losing and finding the scent in their excitement.  But they
were closing all the time.

The old man made the sheet fast and jammed the tiller.  Then he took up
the oar with the knife lashed to it.  He lifted it as lightly as he
could because his hands rebelled at the pain.  Then he opened and
closed them on it lightly to loosen them.  He closed them firmly so
they would take the pain now and would not flinch and watched the
sharks come.  He could see their wide, flattened, shovel-pointed heads
now and their white-tipped wide pectoral fins.  They were hateful
sharks, bad smelling, scavengers as well as killers, and when they were
hungry they would bite at an oar or the rudder of a boat.  It was these
sharks that would cut the turtles' legs and flippers off when the
turtles were asleep on the surface, and they would hit a man in the
water, if they were hungry, even if the man had no smell of fish blood
nor of fish slime on him.

"_Ay_," the old man said.  "_Galanos_.  Come on, _Galanos_."

They came.  But they did not come as the Mako had come.  One turned and
went out of sight under the skiff and the old man could feel the skiff
shake as he jerked and pulled on the fish.  The other watched the old
man with his slitted yellow eyes and then came in fast with his half
circle of jaws wide to hit the fish where he had already been bitten.
The line showed clearly on the top of his brown head and back where the
brain joined the spinal cord and the old man drove the knife on the oar
into the juncture, withdrew it, and drove it in again into the shark's
yellow cat-like eyes.  The shark let go of the fish and slid down,
swallowing what he had taken as he died.

The skiff was still shaking with the destruction the other shark was
doing to the fish and the old man let go the sheet so that the skiff
would swing broadside and bring the shark out from under.  When he saw
the shark he leaned over the side and punched at him.  He hit only meat
and the hide was set hard and he barely got the knife in.  The blow
hurt not only his hands but his shoulder too.  But the shark came up
fast with his head out and the old man hit him squarely in the center
of his flat-topped head as his nose came out of water and lay against
the fish.  The old man withdrew the blade and punched the shark exactly
in the same spot again.  He still hung to the fish with his jaws hooked
and the old man stabbed him in his left eye.  The shark still hung
there.

"No?" the old man said and he drove the blade between the vertebrae and
the brain.  It was an easy shot now and he felt the cartilage sever.
The old man reversed the oar and put the blade between the shark's jaws
to open them.  He twisted the blade and as the shark slid loose he
said, "Go on, _galano_.  Slide down a mile deep.  Go see your friend,
or maybe it's your mother."

The old man wiped the blade of his knife and laid down the oar.  Then
he found the sheet and the sail filled and he brought the skiff onto
her course.

"They must have taken a quarter of him and of the best meat," he said
aloud.  "I wish it were a dream and that I had never hooked him.  I'm
sorry about it, fish.  It makes everything wrong."  He stopped and he
did not want to look at the fish now.  Drained of blood and awash he
looked the colour of the silver backing of a mirror and his stripes
still showed.

"I shouldn't have gone out so far, fish," he said.  "Neither for you
nor for me.  I'm sorry, fish."

Now, he said to himself.  Look to the lashing on the knife and see if
it has been cut.  Then get your hand in order because there still is
more to come.

"I wish I had a stone for the knife," the old man said after he had
checked the lashing on the oar butt.  "I should have brought a stone."
You should have brought many things, he thought.  But you did not bring
them, old man.  Now is no time to think of what you do not have.  Think
of what you can do with what there is.

"You give me much good counsel," he said aloud.  "I'm tired of it."

He held the tiller under his arm and soaked both his hands in the water
as the skiff drove forward.

"God knows how much that last one took," he said.  "But she's much
lighter now."  He did not want to think of the mutilated under-side of
the fish.  He knew that each of the jerking bumps of the shark had been
meat torn away and that the fish now made a trail for all sharks as
wide as a highway through the sea.

He was a fish to keep a man all winter, he thought.  Don't think of
that.  Just rest and try to get your hands in shape to defend what is
left of him.  The blood smell from my hands means nothing now with all
that scent in the water.  Besides they do not bleed much.  There is
nothing cut that means anything.  The bleeding may keep the left from
cramping.

What can I think of now? he thought.  Nothing.  I must think of nothing
and wait for the next ones.  I wish it had really been a dream, he
thought.  But who knows?  It might have turned out well.

The next shark that came was a single shovel-nose.  He came like a pig
to the trough if a pig had a mouth so wide that you could put your head
in it.  The old man let him hit the fish and then drove the knife on
the oar down into his brain.  But the shark jerked backwards as he
rolled and the knife blade snapped.

The old man settled himself to steer.  He did not even watch the big
shark sinking slowly in the water, showing first life-size, then small,
then tiny.  That always fascinated the old man.  But he did not even
watch it now.

"I have the gaff now," he said.  "But it will do no good.  I have the
two oars and the tiller and the short club."

Now they have beaten me, he thought.  I am too old to club sharks to
death.  But I will try it as long as I have the oars and the short club
and the tiller.

He put his hands in the water again to soak them.  It was getting late
in the afternoon and he saw nothing but the sea and the sky.  There was
more wind in the sky than there had been, and soon he hoped that he
would see land.

"You're tired, old man," he said.  "You're tired inside."

The sharks did not hit him again until just before sunset.

The old man saw the brown fins coming along the wide trail the fish
must make in the water.  They were not even quartering on the scent.
They were headed straight for the skiff swimming side by side.

He jammed the tiller, made the sheet fast and reached under the stern
for the club.  It was an oar handle from a broken oar sawed off to
about two and a half feet in length.  He could only use it effectively
with one hand because of the grip of the handle and he took good hold
of it with his right hand, flexing his hand on it, as he watched the
sharks come.  They were both _galanos_.

I must let the first one get a good hold and hit him on the point of
the nose or straight across the top of the head, he thought.

The two sharks closed together and as he saw the one nearest him open
his jaws and sink them into the silver side of the fish, he raised the
club high and brought it down heavy and slamming onto the top of the
shark's broad head.  He felt the rubbery solidity as the club came
down.  But he felt the rigidity of bone too and he struck the shark
once more hard across the point of the nose as he slid down from the
fish.

The other shark had been in and out and now came in again with his jaws
wide.  The old man could see pieces of the meat of the fish spilling
white from the corner of his jaws as he bumped the fish and closed his
jaws.  He swung at him and hit only the head and the shark looked at
him and wrenched the meat loose.  The old man swung the club down on
him again as he slipped away to swallow and hit only the heavy solid
rubberiness.

"Come on, _galano_," the old man said.  "Come in again."

The shark came in a rush and the old man hit him as he shut his jaws.
He hit him solidly and from as high up as he could raise the club.
This time he felt the bone at the base of the brain and he hit him
again in the same place while the shark tore the meat loose sluggishly
and slid down from the fish.

The old man watched for him to come again but neither shark showed.
Then he saw one on the surface swimming in circles.  He did not see the
fin of the other.

I could not expect to kill them, he thought.  I could have in my time.
But I have hurt them both badly and neither one can feel very good.  If
I could have used a bat with two hands I could have killed the first
one surely.  Even now, he thought.

He did not want to look at the fish.  He knew that half of him had been
destroyed.  The sun had gone down while he had been in the fight with
the sharks.

"It will be dark soon," he said.  "Then I should see the glow of
Havana.  If I am too far to the eastward I will see the lights of one
of the new beaches."

I cannot be too far out now, he thought.  I hope no one has been too
worried.  There is only the boy to worry, of course.  But I am sure he
would have confidence.  Many of the older fishermen will worry.  Many
others too, he thought.  I live in a good town.

He could not talk to the fish anymore because the fish had been ruined
too badly.  Then something came into his head.

"Half fish," he said.  "Fish that you were.  I am sorry that I went too
far out.  I ruined us both.  But we have killed many sharks, you and I,
and ruined many others.  How many did you ever kill, old fish?  You do
not have that spear on your head for nothing."

He liked to think of the fish and what he could do to a shark if he
were swimming free.  I should have chopped the bill off to fight them
with, he thought.  But there was no hatchet and then there was no knife.

But if I had, and could have lashed it to an oar butt, what a weapon.
Then we might have fought them together.  What will you do now if they
come in the night?  What can you do?

"Fight them," he said.  "I'll fight them until I die."

But in the dark now and no glow showing and no lights and only the wind
and the steady pull of the sail he felt that perhaps he was already
dead.  He put his two hands together and felt the palms.  They were not
dead and he could bring the pain of life by simply opening and closing
them.  He leaned his back against the stern and knew he was not dead.
His shoulders told him.

I have all those prayers I promised if I caught the fish, he thought.
But I am too tired to say them now.  I better get the sack and put it
over my shoulders.

He lay in the stern and steered and watched for the glow to come in the
sky.  I have half of him, he thought.  Maybe I'll have the luck to
bring the forward half in.  I should have some luck.  No, he said.  You
violated your luck when you went too far outside.

"Don't be silly," he said aloud.  "And keep awake and steer.  You may
have much luck yet."

"I'd like to buy some if there's any place they sell it," he said.

What could I buy it with? he asked himself.  Could I buy it with a lost
harpoon and a broken knife and two bad hands?

"You might," he said.  "You tried to buy it with eighty-four days at
sea.  They nearly sold it to you too."

I must not think nonsense, he thought.  Luck is a thing that comes in
many forms and who can recognize her?  I would take some though in any
form and pay what they asked.  I wish I could see the glow from the
lights, he thought.  I wish too many things.  But that is the thing I
wish for now.  He tried to settle more comfortably to steer and from
his pain he knew he was not dead.

He saw the reflected glare of the lights of the city at what must have
been around ten o'clock at night.  They were only perceptible at first
as the light is in the sky before the moon rises.  Then they were
steady to see across the ocean which was rough now with the increasing
breeze.  He steered inside of the glow and he thought that now, soon,
he must hit the edge of the stream.

Now it is over, he thought.  They will probably hit me again.  But what
can a man do against them in the dark without a weapon?

He was stiff and sore now and his wounds and all of the strained parts
of his body hurt with the cold of the night.  I hope I do not have to
fight again, he thought.  I hope so much I do not have to fight again.

But by midnight he fought and this time he knew the fight was useless.
They came in a pack and he could only see the lines in the water that
their fins made and their phosphorescence as they threw themselves on
the fish.  He clubbed at heads and heard the jaws chop and the shaking
of the skiff as they took hold below.  He clubbed desperately at what
he could only feel and hear and he felt something seize the club and it
was gone.

He jerked the tiller free from the rudder and beat and chopped with it,
holding it in both hands and driving it down again and again.  But they
were up to the bow now and driving in one after the other and together,
tearing off the pieces of meat that showed glowing below the sea as
they turned to come once more.

One came, finally, against the head itself and he knew that it was
over.  He swung the tiller across the shark's head where the jaws were
caught in the heaviness of the fish's head which would not tear.  He
swung it once and twice and again.  He heard the tiller break and he
lunged at the shark with the splintered butt.  He felt it go in and
knowing it was sharp he drove it in again.  The shark let go and rolled
away.  That was the last shark of the pack that came.  There was
nothing more for them to eat.

The old man could hardly breathe now and he felt a strange taste in his
mouth.  It was coppery and sweet and he was afraid of it for a moment.
But there was not much of it.

He spat into the ocean and said, "Eat that, _Galanos_.  And make a
dream you've killed a man."

He knew he was beaten now finally and without remedy and he went back
to the stern and found the jagged end of the tiller would fit in the
slot of the rudder well enough for him to steer.  He settled the sack
around his shoulders and put the skiff on her course.  He sailed
lightly now and he had no thoughts nor any feelings of any kind.  He
was past everything now and he sailed the skiff to make his home port
as well and as intelligently as he could.  In the night sharks hit the
carcass as someone might pick up crumbs from the table.  The old man
paid no attention to them and did not pay any attention to anything
except steering.  He only noticed how lightly and how well the skiff
sailed now there was no great weight beside her.

She's good, he thought.  She is sound and not harmed in any way except
for the tiller.  That is easily replaced.

He could feel he was inside the current now and he could see the lights
of the beach colonies along the shore.  He knew where he was now and it
was nothing to get home.

The wind is our friend, anyway, he thought.  Then he added, sometimes.
And the great sea with our friends and our enemies.  And bed, he
thought.  Bed is my friend.  Just bed, he thought.  Bed will be a great
thing.  It is easy when you are beaten, he thought.  I never knew how
easy it was.  And what beat you, he thought.

"Nothing," he said aloud.  "I went out too far."

When he sailed into the little harbour the lights of the Terrace were
out and he knew everyone was in bed.  The breeze had risen steadily and
was blowing strongly now.  It was quiet in the harbour though and he
sailed up onto the little patch of shingle below the rocks.  There was
no one to help him so he pulled the boat up as far as he could.  Then
he stepped out and made her fast to a rock.

He unstepped the mast and furled the sail and tied it.  Then he
shouldered the mast and started to climb.  It was then he knew the
depth of his tiredness.  He stopped for a moment and looked back and
saw in the reflection from the street light the great tail of the fish
standing up well behind the skiff's stern.  He saw the white naked line
of his backbone and the dark mass of the head with the projecting bill
and all the nakedness between.

He started to climb again and at the top he fell and lay for some time
with the mast across his shoulder.  He tried to get up.  But it was too
difficult and he sat there with the mast on his shoulder and looked at
the road.  A cat passed on the far side going about its business and
the old man watched it.  Then he just watched the road.

Finally he put the mast down and stood up.  He picked the mast up and
put it on his shoulder and started up the road.  He had to sit down
five times before he reached his shack.

Inside the shack he leaned the mast against the wall.  In the dark he
found a water bottle and took a drink.  Then he lay down on the bed.
He pulled the blanket over his shoulders and then over his back and
legs and he slept face down on the newspapers with his arms out
straight and the palms of his hands up.

He was asleep when the boy looked in the door in the morning.  It was
blowing so hard that the drifting-boats would not be going out and the
boy had slept late and then come to the old man's shack as he had come
each morning.  The boy saw that the old man was breathing and then he
saw the old man's hands and he started to cry.  He went out very
quietly to go to bring some coffee and all the way down the road he was
crying.

Many fishermen were around the skiff looking at what was lashed beside
it and one was in the water, his trousers rolled up, measuring the
skeleton with a length of line.

The boy did not go down.  He had been there before and one of the
fishermen was looking after the skiff for him.

"How is he?" one of the fishermen shouted.

"Sleeping," the boy called.  He did not care that they saw him crying.
"Let no one disturb him."

"He was eighteen feet from nose to tail," the fisherman who was
measuring him called.

"I believe it," the boy said.

He went into the Terrace and asked for a can of coffee.

"Hot and with plenty of milk and sugar in it."

"Anything more?"

"No.  Afterwards I will see what he can eat."

"What a fish it was," the proprietor said.  "There has never been such
a fish.  Those were two fine fish you took yesterday too."

"Damn my fish," the boy said and he started to cry again.

"Do you want a drink of any kind?" the proprietor asked.

"No," the boy said.  "Tell them not to bother Santiago.  I'll be back."

"Tell him how sorry I am."

"Thanks," the boy said.

The boy carried the hot can of coffee up to the old man's shack and sat
by him until he woke.  Once it looked as though he were waking.  But he
had gone back into heavy sleep and the boy had gone across the road to
borrow some wood to heat the coffee.

Finally the old man woke.

"Don't sit up," the boy said.  "Drink this."  He poured some of the
coffee in a glass.

The old man took it and drank it.

"They beat me, Manolin," he said.  "They truly beat me."

"He didn't beat you.  Not the fish."

"No.  Truly.  It was afterwards."

"Pedrico is looking after the skiff and the gear.  What do you want
done with the head?"

"Let Pedrico chop it up to use in fish traps."

"And the spear?"

"You keep it if you want it."

"I want it," the boy said.  "Now we must make our plans about the other
things."

"Did they search for me?"

"Of course.  With coast guard and with planes."

"The ocean is very big and a skiff is small and hard to see," the old
man said.  He noticed how pleasant it was to have someone to talk to
instead of speaking only to himself and to the sea.  "I missed you," he
said.  "What did you catch?"

"One the first day.  One the second and two the third."

"Very good."

"Now we fish together again."

"No.  I am not lucky.  I am not lucky anymore."

"The hell with luck," the boy said.  "I'll bring the luck with me."

"What will your family say?"

"I do not care.  I caught two yesterday.  But we will fish together now
for I still have much to learn."

"We must get a good killing lance and always have it on board.  You can
make the blade from a spring leaf from an old Ford.  We can grind it in
Guanabacoa.  It should be sharp and not tempered so it will break.  My
knife broke."

"I'll get another knife and have the spring ground.  How many days of
heavy _brisa_ have we?"

"Maybe three.  Maybe more."

"I will have everything in order," the boy said.  "You get your hands
well old man."

"I know how to care for them.  In the night I spat something strange
and felt something in my chest was broken."

"Get that well too," the boy said.  "Lie down, old man, and I will
bring you your clean shirt.  And something to eat."

"Bring any of the papers of the time that I was gone," the old man said.

"You must get well fast for there is much that I can learn and you can
teach me everything.  How much did you suffer?"

"Plenty," the old man said.

"I'll bring the food and the papers," the boy said.  "Rest well, old
man.  I will bring stuff from the drug-store for your hands."

"Don't forget to tell Pedrico the head is his."

"No.  I will remember."

As the boy went out the door and down the worn coral rock road he was
crying again.

That afternoon there was a party of tourists at the Terrace and looking
down in the water among the empty beer cans and dead barracudas a woman
saw a great long white spine with a huge tail at the end that lifted
and swung with the tide while the east wind blew a heavy steady sea
outside the entrance to the harbour.

"What's that?" she asked a waiter and pointed to the long backbone of
the great fish that was now just garbage waiting to go out with the
tide.

"Tiburon," the waiter said, "Eshark."  He was meaning to explain what
had happened.

"I didn't know sharks had such handsome, beautifully formed tails."

"I didn't either," her male companion said.

Up the road, in his shack, the old man was sleeping again.  He was
still sleeping on his face and the boy was sitting by him watching him.
The old man was dreaming about the lions. 
 In the late summer of that year we lived in a house in a village that
looked across the river and the plain to the mountains. In the bed of
the river there were pebbles and boulders, dry and white in the sun, and
the water was clear and swiftly moving and blue in the channels. Troops
went by the house and down the road and the dust they raised powdered
the leaves of the trees. The trunks of the trees too were dusty and the
leaves fell early that year and we saw the troops marching along the
road and the dust rising and leaves, stirred by the breeze, falling and
the soldiers marching and afterward the road bare and white except for
the leaves.

The plain was rich with crops; there were many orchards of fruit trees
and beyond the plain the mountains were brown and bare. There was
fighting in the mountains and at night we could see the flashes from the
artillery. In the dark it was like summer lightning, but the nights were
cool and there was not the feeling of a storm coming.

Sometimes in the dark we heard the troops marching under the window and
guns going past pulled by motor-tractors. There was much traffic at
night and many mules on the roads with boxes of ammunition on each side
of their pack-saddles and gray motor-trucks that carried men, and other
trucks with loads covered with canvas that moved slower in the traffic.
There were big guns too that passed in the day drawn by tractors, the
long barrels of the guns covered with green branches and green leafy
branches and vines laid over the tractors. To the north we could look
across a valley and see a forest of chestnut trees and behind it another
mountain on this side of the river. There was fighting for that mountain
too, but it was not successful, and in the fall when the rains came the
leaves all fell from the chestnut trees and the branches were bare and
the trunks black with rain. The vineyards were thin and bare-branched
too and all the country wet and brown and dead with the autumn. There
were mists over the river and clouds on the mountain and the trucks
splashed mud on the road and the troops were muddy and wet in their
capes; their rifles were wet and under their capes the two leather
cartridge-boxes on the front of the belts, gray leather boxes heavy with
the packs of clips of thin, long 6.5 mm. cartridges, bulged forward
under the capes so that the men, passing on the road, marched as though
they were six months gone with child.

There were small gray motor-cars that passed going very fast; usually
there was an officer on the seat with the driver and more officers in
the back seat. They splashed more mud than the camions even and if one
of the officers in the back was very small and sitting between two
generals, he himself so small that you could not see his face but only
the top of his cap and his narrow back, and if the car went especially
fast it was probably the King. He lived in Udine and came out in this
way nearly every day to see how things were going, and things went very
badly.

At the start of the winter came the permanent rain and with the rain
came the cholera. But it was checked and in the end only seven thousand
died of it in the army.




                               CHAPTER II

The next year there were many victories. The mountain that was beyond
the valley and the hillside where the chestnut forest grew was captured
and there were victories beyond the plain on the plateau to the south
and we crossed the river in August and lived in a house in Gorizia that
had a fountain and many thick shady trees in a walled garden and a
wistaria vine purple on the side of the house. Now the fighting was in
the next mountains beyond and was not a mile away. The town was very
nice and our house was very fine. The river ran behind us and the town
had been captured very handsomely but the mountains beyond it could not
be taken and I was very glad the Austrians seemed to want to come back
to the town some time, if the war should end, because they did not
bombard it to destroy it but only a little in a military way. People
lived on in it and there were hospitals and cafés and artillery up side
streets and two bawdy houses, one for troops and one for officers, and
with the end of the summer, the cool nights, the fighting in the
mountains beyond the town, the shell-marked iron of the railway bridge,
the smashed tunnel by the river where the fighting had been, the trees
around the square and the long avenue of trees that led to the square;
these with there being girls in the town, the King passing in his motor
car, sometimes now seeing his face and little long necked body and gray
beard like a goat’s chin tuft; all these with the sudden interiors of
houses that had lost a wall through shelling, with plaster and rubble in
their gardens and sometimes in the street, and the whole thing going
well on the Carso made the fall very different from the last fall when
we had been in the country. The war was changed too.

The forest of oak trees on the mountain beyond the town was gone. The
forest had been green in the summer when we had come into the town but
now there were the stumps and the broken trunks and the ground torn up,
and one day at the end of the fall when I was out where the oak forest
had been I saw a cloud coming over the mountain. It came very fast and
the sun went a dull yellow and then everything was gray and the sky was
covered and the cloud came on down the mountain and suddenly we were in
it and it was snow. The snow slanted across the wind, the bare ground
was covered, the stumps of trees projected, there was snow on the guns
and there were paths in the snow going back to the latrines behind
trenches.

Later, below in the town, I watched the snow falling, looking out of the
window of the bawdy house, the house for officers, where I sat with a
friend and two glasses drinking a bottle of Asti, and, looking out at
the snow falling slowly and heavily, we knew it was all over for that
year. Up the river the mountains had not been taken; none of the
mountains beyond the river had been taken. That was all left for next
year. My friend saw the priest from our mess going by in the street,
walking carefully in the slush, and pounded on the window to attract his
attention. The priest looked up. He saw us and smiled. My friend
motioned for him to come in. The priest shook his head and went on. That
night in the mess after the spaghetti course, which every one ate very
quickly and seriously, lifting the spaghetti on the fork until the loose
strands hung clear then lowering it into the mouth, or else using a
continuous lift and sucking into the mouth, helping ourselves to wine
from the grass-covered gallon flask; it swung in a metal cradle and you
pulled the neck of the flask down with the forefinger and the wine,
clear red, tannic and lovely, poured out into the glass held with the
same hand; after this course, the captain commenced picking on the
priest.

The priest was young and blushed easily and wore a uniform like the rest
of us but with a cross in dark red velvet above the left breast pocket
of his gray tunic. The captain spoke pidgin Italian for my doubtful
benefit, in order that I might understand perfectly, that nothing should
be lost.

“Priest to-day with girls,” the captain said looking at the priest and
at me. The priest smiled and blushed and shook his head. This captain
baited him often.

“Not true?” asked the captain. “To-day I see priest with girls.”

“No,” said the priest. The other officers were amused at the baiting.

“Priest not with girls,” went on the captain. “Priest never with girls,”
he explained to me. He took my glass and filled it, looking at my eyes
all the time, but not losing sight of the priest.

“Priest every night five against one.” Every one at the table laughed.
“You understand? Priest every night five against one.” He made a gesture
and laughed loudly. The priest accepted it as a joke.

“The Pope wants the Austrians to win the war,” the major said. “He loves
Franz Joseph. That’s where the money comes from. I am an atheist.”

“Did you ever read the ‘Black Pig’?” asked the lieutenant. “I will get
you a copy. It was that which shook my faith.”

“It is a filthy and vile book,” said the priest. “You do not really like
it.”

“It is very valuable,” said the lieutenant. “It tells you about those
priests. You will like it,” he said to me. I smiled at the priest and he
smiled back across the candle-light. “Don’t you read it,” he said.

“I will get it for you,” said the lieutenant.

“All thinking men are atheists,” the major said. “I do not believe in
the Free Masons however.”

“I believe in the Free Masons,” the lieutenant said. “It is a noble
organization.” Some one came in and as the door opened I could see the
snow falling.

“There will be no more offensive now that the snow has come,” I said.

“Certainly not,” said the major. “You should go on leave. You should go
to Rome, Naples, Sicily——”

“He should visit Amalfi,” said the lieutenant “I will write you cards to
my family in Amalfi. They will love you like a son.”

“He should go to Palermo.”

“He ought to go to Capri.”

“I would like you to see Abruzzi and visit my family at Capracotta,”
said the priest.

“Listen to him talk about the Abruzzi. There’s more snow there than
here. He doesn’t want to see peasants. Let him go to centres of culture
and civilization.”

“He should have fine girls. I will give you the addresses of places in
Naples. Beautiful young girls—accompanied by their mothers. Ha! Ha!
Ha!” The captain spread his hand open, the thumb up and fingers
outspread as when you make shadow pictures. There was a shadow from his
hand on the wall. He spoke again in pidgin Italian. “You go away like
this,” he pointed to the thumb, “and come back like this,” he touched
the little finger. Every one laughed.

“Look,” said the captain. He spread the hand again. Again the
candle-light made its shadows on the wall. He started with the upright
thumb and named in their order the thumb and four fingers, “soto-tenente
(the thumb), tenente (first finger), capitano (next finger), maggiore
(next to the little finger), and tenente-colonello (the little finger).
You go away soto-tenente! You come back soto-colonello!” They all
laughed. The captain was having a great success with finger games. He
looked at the priest and shouted, “Every night priest five against one!”
They all laughed again.

“You must go on leave at once,” the major said.

“I would like to go with you and show you things,” the lieutenant said.

“When you come back bring a phonograph.”

“Bring good opera disks.”

“Bring Caruso.”

“Don’t bring Caruso. He bellows.”

“Don’t you wish you could bellow like him?”

“He bellows. I say he bellows!”

“I would like you to go to Abruzzi,” the priest said. The others were
shouting. “There is good hunting. You would like the people and though
it is cold it is clear and dry. You could stay with my family. My father
is a famous hunter.”

“Come on,” said the captain. “We go whorehouse before it shuts.”

“Good-night,” I said to the priest.

“Good-night,” he said.




                              CHAPTER III

When I came back to the front we still lived in that town. There were
many more guns in the country around and the spring had come. The fields
were green and there were small green shoots on the vines, the trees
along the road had small leaves and a breeze came from the sea. I saw
the town with the hill and the old castle above it in a cup in the hills
with the mountains beyond, brown mountains with a little green on their
slopes. In the town there were more guns, there were some new hospitals,
you met British men and sometimes women, on the street, and a few more
houses had been hit by shell fire. It was warm and like the spring and I
walked down the alleyway of trees, warmed from the sun on the wall, and
found we still lived in the same house and that it all looked the same
as when I had left it. The door was open, there was a soldier sitting on
a bench outside in the sun, an ambulance was waiting by the side door
and inside the door, as I went in, there was the smell of marble floors
and hospital. It was all as I had left it except that now it was spring.
I looked in the door of the big room and saw the major sitting at his
desk, the window open and the sunlight coming into the room. He did not
see me and I did not know whether to go in and report or go upstairs
first and clean up. I decided to go on upstairs.

The room I shared with the lieutenant Rinaldi looked out on the
courtyard. The window was open, my bed was made up with blankets and my
things hung on the wall, the gas mask in an oblong tin can, the steel
helmet on the same peg. At the foot of the bed was my flat trunk, and my
winter boots, the leather shiny with oil, were on the trunk. My Austrian
sniper’s rifle with its blued octagon barrel and the lovely dark walnut,
cheek-fitted, _schutzen_ stock, hung over the two beds. The telescope
that fitted it was, I remembered, locked in the trunk. The lieutenant,
Rinaldi, lay asleep on the other bed. He woke when he heard me in the
room and sat up.

“Ciaou!” he said. “What kind of time did you have?”

“Magnificent.”

We shook hands and he put his arm around my neck and kissed me.

“Oughf,” I said.

“You’re dirty,” he said. “You ought to wash. Where did you go and what
did you do? Tell me everything at once.”

“I went everywhere. Milan, Florence, Rome, Naples, Villa San Giovanni,
Messina, Taormina——”

“You talk like a time-table. Did you have any beautiful adventures?”

“Yes.”

“Where?”

“Milano, Firenze, Roma, Napoli——”

“That’s enough. Tell me really what was the best.”

“In Milano.”

“That was because it was first. Where did you meet her? In the Cova?
Where did you go? How did you feel? Tell me everything at once. Did you
stay all night?”

“Yes.”

“That’s nothing. Here now we have beautiful girls. New girls never been
to the front before.”

“Wonderful.”

“You don’t believe me? We will go now this afternoon and see. And in the
town we have beautiful English girls. I am now in love with Miss
Barkley. I will take you to call. I will probably marry Miss Barkley.”

“I have to get washed and report. Doesn’t anybody work now?”

“Since you are gone we have nothing but frostbites, chilblains,
jaundice, gonorrhea, self-inflicted wounds, pneumonia and hard and soft
chancres. Every week some one gets wounded by rock fragments. There are
a few real wounded. Next week the war starts again. Perhaps it starts
again. They say so. Do you think I would do right to marry Miss
Barkley—after the war of course?”

“Absolutely,” I said and poured the basin full of water.

“To-night you will tell me everything,” said Rinaldi. “Now I must go
back to sleep to be fresh and beautiful for Miss Barkley.”

I took off my tunic and shirt and washed in the cold water in the basin.
While I rubbed myself with a towel I looked around the room and out the
window and at Rinaldi lying with his eyes closed on the bed. He was
good-looking, was my age, and he came from Amalfi. He loved being a
surgeon and we were great friends. While I was looking at him he opened
his eyes.

“Have you any money?”

“Yes.”

“Loan me fifty lire.”

I dried my hands and took out my pocket-book from the inside of my tunic
hanging on the wall. Rinaldi took the note, folded it without rising
from the bed and slid it in his breeches pocket. He smiled, “I must make
on Miss Barkley the impression of a man of sufficient wealth. You are my
great and good friend and financial protector.”

“Go to hell,” I said.

That night at the mess I sat next to the priest and he was disappointed
and suddenly hurt that I had not gone to the Abruzzi. He had written to
his father that I was coming and they had made preparations. I myself
felt as badly as he did and could not understand why I had not gone. It
was what I had wanted to do and I tried to explain how one thing had led
to another and finally he saw it and understood that I had really wanted
to go and it was almost all right. I had drunk much wine and afterward
coffee and Strega and I explained, winefully, how we did not do the
things we wanted to do; we never did such things.

We two were talking while the others argued. I had wanted to go to
Abruzzi. I had gone to no place where the roads were frozen and hard as
iron, where it was clear cold and dry and the snow was dry and powdery
and hare-tracks in the snow and the peasants took off their hats and
called you Lord and there was good hunting. I had gone to no such place
but to the smoke of cafés and nights when the room whirled and you
needed to look at the wall to make it stop, nights in bed, drunk, when
you knew that that was all there was, and the strange excitement of
waking and not knowing who it was with you, and the world all unreal in
the dark and so exciting that you must resume again unknowing and not
caring in the night, sure that this was all and all and all and not
caring. Suddenly to care very much and to sleep to wake with it
sometimes morning and all that had been there gone and everything sharp
and hard and clear and sometimes a dispute about the cost. Sometimes
still pleasant and fond and warm and breakfast and lunch. Sometimes all
niceness gone and glad to get out on the street but always another day
starting and then another night. I tried to tell about the night and the
difference between the night and the day and how the night was better
unless the day was very clean and cold and I could not tell it; as I
cannot tell it now. But if you have had it you know. He had not had it
but he understood that I had really wanted to go to the Abruzzi but had
not gone and we were still friends, with many tastes alike, but with the
difference between us. He had always known what I did not know and what,
when I learned it, I was always able to forget. But I did not know that
then, although I learned it later. In the meantime we were all at the
mess, the meal was finished, and the argument went on. We two stopped
talking and the captain shouted, “Priest not happy. Priest not happy
without girls.”

“I am happy,” said the priest.

“Priest not happy. Priest wants Austrians to win the war,” the captain
said. The others listened. The priest shook his head.

“No,” he said.

“Priest wants us never to attack. Don’t you want us never to attack?”

“No. If there is a war I suppose we must attack.”

“Must attack. Shall attack!”

The priest nodded.

“Leave him alone,” the major said. “He’s all right.”

“He can’t do anything about it anyway,” the captain said. We all got up
and left the table.




                               CHAPTER IV

The battery in the next garden woke me in the morning and I saw the sun
coming through the window and got out of the bed. I went to the window
and looked out. The gravel paths were moist and the grass was wet with
dew. The battery fired twice and the air came each time like a blow and
shook the window and made the front of my pajamas flap. I could not see
the guns but they were evidently firing directly over us. It was a
nuisance to have them there but it was a comfort that they were no
bigger. As I looked out at the garden I heard a motor truck starting on
the road. I dressed, went downstairs, had some coffee in the kitchen and
went out to the garage.

Ten cars were lined up side by side under the long shed. They were
top-heavy, blunt-nosed ambulances, painted gray and built like
moving-vans. The mechanics were working on one out in the yard. Three
others were up in the mountains at dressing stations.

“Do they ever shell that battery?” I asked one of the mechanics.

“No, Signor Tenente. It is protected by the little hill.”

“How’s everything?”

“Not so bad. This machine is no good but the others march.” He stopped
working and smiled. “Were you on permission?”

“Yes.”

He wiped his hands on his jumper and grinned. “You have a good time?”
The others all grinned too.

“Fine,” I said. “What’s the matter with this machine?”

“It’s no good. One thing after another.”

“What’s the matter now?”

“New rings.”

I left them working, the car looking disgraced and empty with the engine
open and parts spread on the work bench, and went in under the shed and
looked at each of the cars. They were moderately clean, a few freshly
washed, the others dusty. I looked at the tires carefully, looking for
cuts or stone bruises. Everything seemed in good condition. It evidently
made no difference whether I was there to look after things or not. I
had imagined that the condition of the cars, whether or not things were
obtainable, the smooth functioning of the business of removing wounded
and sick from the dressing stations, hauling them back from the
mountains to the clearing station and then distributing them to the
hospitals named on their papers, depended to a considerable extent on
myself. Evidently it did not matter whether I was there or not.

“Has there been any trouble getting parts?” I asked the sergeant
mechanic.

“No, Signor Tenente.”

“Where is the gasoline park now?”

“At the same place.”

“Good,” I said and went back to the house and drank another bowl of
coffee at the mess table. The coffee was a pale gray and sweet with
condensed milk. Outside the window it was a lovely spring morning. There
was that beginning of a feeling of dryness in the nose that meant the
day would be hot later on. That day I visited the posts in the mountains
and was back in town late in the afternoon.

The whole thing seemed to run better while I was away. The offensive was
going to start again I heard. The division for which we worked were to
attack at a place up the river and the major told me that I would see
about the posts for during the attack. The attack would cross the river
up above the narrow gorge and spread up the hillside. The posts for the
cars would have to be as near the river as they could get and keep
covered. They would, of course, be selected by the infantry but we were
supposed to work it out. It was one of those things that gave you a
false feeling of soldiering.

I was very dusty and dirty and went up to my room to wash. Rinaldi was
sitting on the bed with a copy of Hugo’s English grammar. He was
dressed, wore his black boots, and his hair shone.

“Splendid,” he said when he saw me. “You will come with me to see Miss
Barkley.”

“No.”

“Yes. You will please come and make me a good impression on her.”

“All right. Wait till I get cleaned up.”

“Wash up and come as you are.”

I washed, brushed my hair and we started.

“Wait a minute,” Rinaldi said. “Perhaps we should have a drink.” He
opened his trunk and took out a bottle.

“Not Strega,” I said.

“No. Grappa.”

“All right.”

He poured two glasses and we touched them, first fingers extended. The
grappa was very strong.

“Another?”

“All right,” I said. We drank the second grappa, Rinaldi put away the
bottle and we went down the stairs. It was hot walking through the town
but the sun was starting to go down and it was very pleasant. The
British hospital was a big villa built by Germans before the war. Miss
Barkley was in the garden. Another nurse was with her. We saw their
white uniforms through the trees and walked toward them. Rinaldi
saluted. I saluted too but more moderately.

“How do you do?” Miss Barkley said. “You’re not an Italian, are you?”

“Oh, no.”

Rinaldi was talking with the other nurse. They were laughing.

“What an odd thing—to be in the Italian army.”

“It’s not really the army. It’s only the ambulance.”

“It’s very odd though. Why did you do it?”

“I don’t know,” I said. “There isn’t always an explanation for
everything.”

“Oh, isn’t there? I was brought up to think there was.”

“That’s awfully nice.”

“_Do_ we have to go on and talk this way?”

“No,” I said.

“That’s a relief. Isn’t it?”

“What is the stick?” I asked. Miss Barkley was quite tall. She wore what
seemed to me to be a nurse’s uniform, was blonde and had a tawny skin
and gray eyes. I thought she was very beautiful. She was carrying a thin
rattan stick like a toy riding-crop, bound in leather.

“It belonged to a boy who was killed last year.”

“I’m awfully sorry.”

“He was a very nice boy. He was going to marry me and he was killed in
the Somme.”

“It was a ghastly show.”

“Were you there?”

“No.”

“I’ve heard about it,” she said. “There’s not really any war of that
sort down here. They sent me the little stick. His mother sent it to me.
They returned it with his things.”

“Had you been engaged long?”

“Eight years. We grew up together.”

“And why didn’t you marry?”

“I don’t know,” she said. “I was a fool not to. I could have given him
that anyway. But I thought it would be bad for him.”

“I see.”

“Have you ever loved any one?”

“No,” I said.

We sat down on a bench and I looked at her.

“You have beautiful hair,” I said.

“Do you like it?”

“Very much.”

“I was going to cut it all off when he died.”

“No.”

“I wanted to do something for him. You see I didn’t care about the other
thing and he could have had it all. He could have had anything he wanted
if I would have known. I would have married him or anything. I know all
about it now. But then he wanted to go to war and I didn’t know.”

I did not say anything.

“I didn’t know about anything then. I thought it would be worse for him.
I thought perhaps he couldn’t stand it and then of course he was killed
and that was the end of it.”

“I don’t know.”

“Oh, yes,” she said. “That’s the end of it.”

We looked at Rinaldi talking with the other nurse.

“What is her name?”

“Ferguson. Helen Ferguson. Your friend is a doctor, isn’t he?”

“Yes. He’s very good.”

“That’s splendid. You rarely find any one any good this close to the
front. This is close to the front, isn’t it?”

“Quite.”

“It’s a silly front,” she said. “But it’s very beautiful. Are they going
to have an offensive?”

“Yes.”

“Then we’ll have to work. There’s no work now.”

“Have you done nursing long?”

“Since the end of ’fifteen. I started when he did. I remember having a
silly idea he might come to the hospital where I was. With a sabre cut,
I suppose, and a bandage around his head. Or shot through the shoulder.
Something picturesque.”

“This is the picturesque front,” I said.

“Yes,” she said. “People can’t realize what France is like. If they did,
it couldn’t all go on. He didn’t have a sabre cut. They blew him all to
bits.”

I didn’t say anything.

“Do you suppose it will always go on?”

“No.”

“What’s to stop it?”

“It will crack somewhere.”

“We’ll crack. We’ll crack in France. They can’t go on doing things like
the Somme and not crack.”

“They won’t crack here,” I said.

“You think not?”

“No. They did very well last summer.”

“They may crack,” she said. “Anybody may crack.”

“The Germans too.”

“No,” she said. “I think not.”

We went over toward Rinaldi and Miss Ferguson.

“You love Italy?” Rinaldi asked Miss Ferguson in English.

“Quite well.”

“No understand,” Rinaldi shook his head.

“Abbastanza bene,” I translated. He shook his head.

“That is not good. You love England?”

“Not too well. I’m Scotch, you see.”

Rinaldi looked at me blankly.

“She’s Scotch, so she loves Scotland better than England,” I said in
Italian.

“But Scotland is England.”

I translated this for Miss Ferguson.

“Pas encore,” said Miss Ferguson.

“Not really?”

“Never. We do not like the English.”

“Not like the English? Not like Miss Barkley?”

“Oh, that’s different. You mustn’t take everything so literally.”

After a while we said good-night and left. Walking home Rinaldi said,
“Miss Barkley prefers you to me. That is very clear. But the little
Scotch one is very nice.”

“Very,” I said. I had not noticed her. “You like her?”

“No,” said Rinaldi.




                               CHAPTER V

The next afternoon I went to call on Miss Barkley again. She was not in
the garden and I went to the side door of the villa where the ambulances
drove up. Inside I saw the head nurse, who said Miss Barkley was on
duty—“there’s a war on, you know.”

I said I knew.

“You’re the American in the Italian army?” she asked.

“Yes, ma’am.”

“How did you happen to do that? Why didn’t you join up with us?”

“I don’t know,” I said. “Could I join now?”

“I’m afraid not now. Tell me. Why did you join up with the Italians?”

“I was in Italy,” I said, “and I spoke Italian.”

“Oh,” she said. “I’m learning it. It’s a beautiful language.”

“Somebody said you should be able to learn it in two weeks.”

“Oh, I’ll not learn it in two weeks. I’ve studied it for months now. You
may come and see her after seven o’clock if you wish. She’ll be off
then. But don’t bring a lot of Italians.”

“Not even for the beautiful language?”

“No. Nor for the beautiful uniforms.”

“Good-evening,” I said.

“A rivederci, Tenente.”

“A rivederla.” I saluted and went out. It was impossible to salute
foreigners as an Italian, without embarrassment. The Italian salute
never seemed made for export.

The day had been hot. I had been up the river to the bridgehead at
Plava. It was there that the offensive was to begin. It had been
impossible to advance on the far side the year before because there was
only one road leading down from the pass to the pontoon bridge and it
was under machine-gun and shell fire for nearly a mile. It was not wide
enough either to carry all the transport for an offensive and the
Austrians could make a shambles out of it. But the Italians had crossed
and spread out a little way on the far side to hold about a mile and a
half on the Austrian side of the river. It was a nasty place and the
Austrians should not have let them hold it. I suppose it was mutual
tolerance because the Austrians still kept a bridgehead further down the
river. The Austrian trenches were above on the hillside only a few yards
from the Italian lines. There had been a little town but it was all
rubble. There was what was left of a railway station and a smashed
permanent bridge that could not be repaired and used because it was in
plain sight.

I went along the narrow road down toward the river, left the car at the
dressing station under the hill, crossed the pontoon bridge, which was
protected by a shoulder of the mountain, and went through the trenches
in the smashed-down town and along the edge of the slope. Everybody was
in the dugouts. There were racks of rockets standing to be touched off
to call for help from the artillery or to signal with if the telephone
wires were cut. It was quiet, hot and dirty. I looked across the wire at
the Austrian lines. Nobody was in sight. I had a drink with a captain
that I knew in one of the dugouts and went back across the bridge.

A new wide road was being finished that would go over the mountain and
zig-zag down to the bridge. When this road was finished the offensive
would start. It came down through the forest in sharp turns. The system
was to bring everything down the new road and take the empty trucks,
carts and loaded ambulances and all returning traffic up the old narrow
road. The dressing station was on the Austrian side of the river under
the edge of the hill and stretcher-bearers would bring the wounded back
across the pontoon bridge. It would be the same when the offensive
started. As far as I could make out the last mile or so of the new road
where it started to level out would be able to be shelled steadily by
the Austrians. It looked as though it might be a mess. But I found a
place where the cars would be sheltered after they had passed that last
bad-looking bit and could wait for the wounded to be brought across the
pontoon bridge. I would have liked to drive over the new road but it was
not yet finished. It looked wide and well made with a good grade and the
turns looked very impressive where you could see them through openings
in the forest on the mountain side. The cars would be all right with
their good metal-to-metal brakes and anyway, coming down, they would not
be loaded. I drove back up the narrow road.

Two carabinieri held the car up. A shell had fallen and while we waited
three others fell up the road. They were seventy-sevens and came with a
whishing rush of air, a hard bright burst and flash and then gray smoke
that blew across the road. The carabinieri waved us to go on. Passing
where the shells had landed I avoided the small broken places and
smelled the high explosive and the smell of blasted clay and stone and
freshly shattered flint. I drove back to Gorizia and our villa and, as I
said, went to call on Miss Barkley, who was on duty.

At dinner I ate very quickly and left for the villa where the British
had their hospital. It was really very large and beautiful and there
were fine trees in the grounds. Miss Barkley was sitting on a bench in
the garden. Miss Ferguson was with her. They seemed glad to see me and
in a little while Miss Ferguson excused herself and went away.

“I’ll leave you two,” she said. “You get along very well without me.”

“Don’t go, Helen,” Miss Barkley said.

“I’d really rather. I must write some letters.”

“Good-night,” I said.

“Good-night, Mr. Henry.”

“Don’t write anything that will bother the censor.”

“Don’t worry. I only write about what a beautiful place we live in and
how brave the Italians are.”

“That way you’ll be decorated.”

“That will be nice. Good-night, Catherine.”

“I’ll see you in a little while,” Miss Barkley said. Miss Ferguson
walked away in the dark.

“She’s nice,” I said.

“Oh, yes, she’s very nice. She’s a nurse.”

“Aren’t you a nurse?”

“Oh, no. I’m something called a V. A. D. We work very hard but no one
trusts us.”

“Why not?”

“They don’t trust us when there’s nothing going on. When there is really
work they trust us.”

“What is the difference?”

“A nurse is like a doctor. It takes a long time to be. A V. A. D. is a
short cut.”

“I see.”

“The Italians didn’t want women so near the front. So we’re all on very
special behavior. We don’t go out.”

“I can come here though.”

“Oh, yes. We’re not cloistered.”

“Let’s drop the war.”

“It’s very hard. There’s no place to drop it.”

“Let’s drop it anyway.”

“All right.”

We looked at each other in the dark. I thought she was very beautiful
and I took her hand. She let me take it and I held it and put my arm
around under her arm.

“No,” she said. I kept my arm where it was.

“Why not?”

“No.”

“Yes,” I said. “Please.” I leaned forward in the dark to kiss her and
there was a sharp stinging flash. She had slapped my face hard. Her hand
had hit my nose and eyes, and tears came in my eyes from the reflex.

“I’m so sorry,” she said. I felt I had a certain advantage.

“You were quite right.”

“I’m dreadfully sorry,” she said. “I just couldn’t stand the
nurse’s-evening-off aspect of it. I didn’t mean to hurt you. I did hurt
you, didn’t I?”

She was looking at me in the dark. I was angry and yet certain, seeing
it all ahead like the moves in a chess game.

“You did exactly right,” I said. “I don’t mind at all.”

“Poor man.”

“You see I’ve been leading a sort of a funny life. And I never even talk
English. And then you are so very beautiful.” I looked at her.

“You don’t need to say a lot of nonsense. I said I was sorry. We do get
along.”

“Yes,” I said. “And we have gotten away from the war.”

She laughed. It was the first time I had ever heard her laugh. I watched
her face.

“You are sweet,” she said.

“No, I’m not.”

“Yes. You are a dear. I’d be glad to kiss you if you don’t mind.”

I looked in her eyes and put my arm around her as I had before and
kissed her. I kissed her hard and held her tight and tried to open her
lips; they were closed tight. I was still angry and as I held her
suddenly she shivered. I held her close against me and could feel her
heart beating and her lips opened and her head went back against my hand
and then she was crying on my shoulder.

“Oh, darling,” she said. “You will be good to me, won’t you?”

What the hell, I thought. I stroked her hair and patted her shoulder.
She was crying.

“You will, won’t you?” She looked up at me. “Because we’re going to have
a strange life.”

After a while I walked with her to the door of the villa and she went in
and I walked home. Back at the villa I went upstairs to the room.
Rinaldi was lying on his bed. He looked at me.

“So you make progress with Miss Barkley?”

“We are friends.”

“You have that pleasant air of a dog in heat.”

I did not understand the word.

“Of a what?”

He explained.

“You,” I said, “have that pleasant air of a dog who—”

“Stop it,” he said. “In a little while we would say insulting things.”
He laughed.

“Good-night,” I said.

“Good-night, little puppy.”

I knocked over his candle with the pillow and got into bed in the dark.

Rinaldi picked up the candle, lit it and went on reading.




                               CHAPTER VI

I was away for two days at the posts. When I got home it was too late
and I did not see Miss Barkley until the next evening. She was not in
the garden and I had to wait in the office of the hospital until she
came down. There were many marble busts on painted wooden pillars along
the walls of the room they used for an office. The hall too, that the
office opened on, was lined with them. They had the complete marble
quality of all looking alike. Sculpture had always seemed a dull
business—still, bronzes looked like something. But marble busts all
looked like a cemetery. There was one fine cemetery though—the one at
Pisa. Genoa was the place to see the bad marbles. This had been the
villa of a very wealthy German and the busts must have cost him plenty.
I wondered who had done them and how much he got. I tried to make out
whether they were members of the family or what; but they were all
uniformly classical. You could not tell anything about them.

I sat on a chair and held my cap. We were supposed to wear steel helmets
even in Gorizia but they were uncomfortable and too bloody theatrical in
a town where the civilian inhabitants had not been evacuated. I wore one
when we went up to the posts and carried an English gas mask. We were
just beginning to get some of them. They were a real mask. Also we were
required to wear an automatic pistol; even doctors and sanitary
officers. I felt it against the back of the chair. You were liable to
arrest if you did not have one worn in plain sight. Rinaldi carried a
holster stuffed with toilet paper. I wore a real one and felt like a
gunman until I practised firing it. It was an Astra 7.65 caliber with a
short barrel and it jumped so sharply when you let it off that there was
no question of hitting anything. I practised with it, holding below the
target and trying to master the jerk of the ridiculous short barrel
until I could hit within a yard of where I aimed at twenty paces and
then the ridiculousness of carrying a pistol at all came over me and I
soon forgot it and carried it flopping against the small of my back with
no feeling at all except a vague sort of shame when I met
English-speaking people. I sat now in the chair and an orderly of some
sort looked at me disapprovingly from behind a desk while I looked at
the marble floor, the pillars with the marble busts, and the frescoes on
the wall and waited for Miss Barkley. The frescoes were not bad. Any
frescoes were good when they started to peel and flake off.

I saw Catherine Barkley coming down the hall, and stood up. She did not
seem tall walking toward me but she looked very lovely.

“Good-evening, Mr. Henry,” she said.

“How do you do?” I said. The orderly was listening behind the desk.

“Shall we sit here or go out in the garden?”

“Let’s go out. It’s much cooler.”

I walked behind her out into the garden, the orderly looking after us.
When we were out on the gravel drive she said, “Where have you been?”

“I’ve been out on post.”

“You couldn’t have sent me a note?”

“No,” I said. “Not very well. I thought I was coming back.”

“You ought to have let me know, darling.”

We were off the driveway, walking under the trees. I took her hands,
then stopped and kissed her.

“Isn’t there anywhere we can go?”

“No,” she said. “We have to just walk here. You’ve been away a long
time.”

“This is the third day. But I’m back now.”

She looked at me, “And you do love me?”

“Yes.”

“You did say you loved me, didn’t you?”

“Yes,” I lied. “I love you.” I had not said it before.

“And you call me Catherine?”

“Catherine.” We walked on a way and were stopped under a tree.

“Say, ‘I’ve come back to Catherine in the night.’”

“I’ve come back to Catherine in the night.”

“Oh, darling, you have come back, haven’t you?”

“Yes.”

“I love you so and it’s been awful. You won’t go away?”

“No. I’ll always come back.”

“Oh, I love you so. Please put your hand there again.”

“It’s not been away.” I turned her so I could see her face when I kissed
her and I saw that her eyes were shut. I kissed both her shut eyes. I
thought she was probably a little crazy. It was all right if she was. I
did not care what I was getting into. This was better than going every
evening to the house for officers where the girls climbed all over you
and put your cap on backward as a sign of affection between their trips
upstairs with brother officers. I knew I did not love Catherine Barkley
nor had any idea of loving her. This was a game, like bridge, in which
you said things instead of playing cards. Like bridge you had to pretend
you were playing for money or playing for some stakes. Nobody had
mentioned what the stakes were. It was all right with me.

“I wish there was some place we could go,” I said. I was experiencing
the masculine difficulty of making love very long standing up.

“There isn’t any place,” she said. She came back from wherever she had
been.

“We might sit there just for a little while.”

We sat on the flat stone bench and I held Catherine Barkley’s hand. She
would not let me put my arm around her.

“Are you very tired?” she asked.

“No.”

She looked down at the grass.

“This is a rotten game we play, isn’t it?”

“What game?”

“Don’t be dull.”

“I’m not, on purpose.”

“You’re a nice boy,” she said. “And you play it as well as you know how.
But it’s a rotten game.”

“Do you always know what people think?”

“Not always. But I do with you. You don’t have to pretend you love me.
That’s over for the evening. Is there anything you’d like to talk
about?”

“But I do love you.”

“Please let’s not lie when we don’t have to. I had a very fine little
show and I’m all right now. You see I’m not mad and I’m not gone off.
It’s only a little sometimes.”

I pressed her hand, “Dear Catherine.”

“It sounds very funny now—Catherine. You don’t pronounce it very much
alike. But you’re very nice. You’re a very good boy.”

“That’s what the priest said.”

“Yes, you’re very good. And you will come and see me?”

“Of course.”

“And you don’t have to say you love me. That’s all over for a while.”
She stood up and put out her hand. “Good-night.”

I wanted to kiss her.

“No,” she said. “I’m awfully tired.”

“Kiss me, though,” I said.

“I’m awfully tired, darling.”

“Kiss me.”

“Do you want to very much?”

“Yes.”

We kissed and she broke away suddenly. “No. Good-night, please,
darling.” We walked to the door and I saw her go in and down the hall. I
liked to watch her move. She went on down the hall. I went on home. It
was a hot night and there was a good deal going on up in the mountains.
I watched the flashes on San Gabriele.

I stopped in front of the Villa Rossa. The shutters were up but it was
still going on inside. Somebody was singing. I went on home. Rinaldi
came in while I was undressing.

“Ah, ha!” he said. “It does not go so well. Baby is puzzled.”

“Where have you been?”

“At the Villa Rossa. It was very edifying, baby. We all sang. Where have
you been?”

“Calling on the British.”

“Thank God I did not become involved with the British.”




                              CHAPTER VII

I came back the next afternoon from our first mountain post and stopped
the car at the _smistimento_ where the wounded and sick were sorted by
their papers and the papers marked for the different hospitals. I had
been driving and I sat in the car and the driver took the papers in. It
was a hot day and the sky was very bright and blue and the road was
white and dusty. I sat in the high seat of the Fiat and thought about
nothing. A regiment went by in the road and I watched them pass. The men
were hot and sweating. Some wore their steel helmets but most of them
carried them slung from their packs. Most of the helmets were too big
and came down almost over the ears of the men who wore them. The
officers all wore helmets; better-fitting helmets. It was half of the
brigata Basilicata. I identified them by their red and white striped
collar mark. There were stragglers going by long after the regiment had
passed—men who could not keep up with their platoons. They were sweaty,
dusty and tired. Some looked pretty bad. A soldier came along after the
last of the stragglers. He was walking with a limp. He stopped and sat
down beside the road. I got down and went over.

“What’s the matter?”

He looked at me, then stood up.

“I’m going on.”

“What’s the trouble?”

“—— the war.”

“What’s wrong with your leg?”

“It’s not my leg. I got a rupture.”

“Why don’t you ride with the transport?” I asked. “Why don’t you go to
the hospital?”

“They won’t let me. The lieutenant said I slipped the truss on purpose.”

“Let me feel it.”

“It’s way out.”

“Which side is it on?”

“Here.”

I felt it.

“Cough,” I said.

“I’m afraid it will make it bigger. It’s twice as big as it was this
morning.”

“Sit down,” I said. “As soon as I get the papers on these wounded I’ll
take you along the road and drop you with your medical officers.”

“He’ll say I did it on purpose.”

“They can’t do anything,” I said. “It’s not a wound. You’ve had it
before, haven’t you?”

“But I lost the truss.”

“They’ll send you to a hospital.”

“Can’t I stay here, Tenente?”

“No, I haven’t any papers for you.”

The driver came out of the door with the papers for the wounded in the
car.

“Four for 105. Two for 132,” he said. They were hospitals beyond the
river.

“You drive,” I said. I helped the soldier with the rupture up on the
seat with us.

“You speak English?” he asked.

“Sure.”

“How you like this goddam war?”

“Rotten.”

“I say it’s rotten. Jesus Christ, I say it’s rotten.”

“Were you in the States?”

“Sure. In Pittsburg. I knew you was an American.”

“Don’t I talk Italian good enough?”

“I knew you was an American all right.”

“Another American,” said the driver in Italian looking at the hernia
man.

“Listen, lootenant. Do you have to take me to that regiment?”

“Yes.”

“Because the captain doctor knew I had this rupture. I threw away the
goddam truss so it would get bad and I wouldn’t have to go to the line
again.”

“I see.”

“Couldn’t you take me no place else?”

“If it was closer to the front I could take you to a first medical post.
But back here you’ve got to have papers.”

“If I go back they’ll make me get operated on and then they’ll put me in
the line all the time.”

I thought it over.

“You wouldn’t want to go in the line all the time, would you?” he asked.

“No.”

“Jesus Christ, ain’t this a goddam war?”

“Listen,” I said. “You get out and fall down by the road and get a bump
on your head and I’ll pick you up on our way back and take you to a
hospital. We’ll stop by the road here, Aldo.” We stopped at the side of
the road. I helped him down.

“I’ll be right here, lieutenant,” he said.

“So long,” I said. We went on and passed the regiment about a mile
ahead, then crossed the river, cloudy with snow-water and running fast
through the spiles of the bridge, to ride along the road across the
plain and deliver the wounded at the two hospitals. I drove coming back
and went fast with the empty car to find the man from Pittsburg. First
we passed the regiment, hotter and slower than ever: then the
stragglers. Then we saw a horse ambulance stopped by the road. Two men
were lifting the hernia man to put him in. They had come back for him.
He shook his head at me. His helmet was off and his forehead was
bleeding below the hair line. His nose was skinned and there was dust on
the bloody patch and dust in his hair.

“Look at the bump, lieutenant!” he shouted. “Nothing to do. They come
back for me.”



When I got back to the villa it was five o’clock and I went out where we
washed the cars, to take a shower. Then I made out my report in my room,
sitting in my trousers and an undershirt in front of the open window. In
two days the offensive was to start and I would go with the cars to
Plava. It was a long time since I had written to the States and I knew I
should write but I had let it go so long that it was almost impossible
to write now. There was nothing to write about. I sent a couple of army
Zona di Guerra post-cards, crossing out everything except, I am well.
That should handle them. Those post-cards would be very fine in America;
strange and mysterious. This was a strange and mysterious war zone but I
supposed it was quite well run and grim compared to other wars with the
Austrians. The Austrian army was created to give Napoleon victories; any
Napoleon. I wished we had a Napoleon, but instead we had Il Generale
Cadorna, fat and prosperous, and Vittorio Emmanuele, the tiny man with
the long thin neck and the goat beard. Over on the right they had the
Duke of Aosta. Maybe he was too good-looking to be a great general but
he looked like a man. Lots of them would have liked him to be king. He
looked like a king. He was the King’s uncle and commanded the third
army. We were in the second army. There were some British batteries up
with the third army. I had met two gunners from that lot, in Milan. They
were very nice and we had a big evening. They were big and shy and
embarrassed and very appreciative together of anything that happened. I
wish that I was with the British. It would have been much simpler. Still
I would probably have been killed. Not in this ambulance business. Yes,
even in the ambulance business. British ambulance drivers were killed
sometimes. Well, I knew I would not be killed. Not in this war. It did
not have anything to do with me. It seemed no more dangerous to me
myself than war in the movies. I wished to God it was over though. Maybe
it would finish this summer. Maybe the Austrians would crack. They had
always cracked in other wars. What was the matter with this war?
Everybody said the French were through. Rinaldi said that the French had
mutinied and troops marched on Paris. I asked him what happened and he
said, “Oh, they stopped them.” I wanted to go to Austria without war. I
wanted to go to the Black Forest. I wanted to go to the Hartz Mountains.
Where were the Hartz Mountains anyway? They were fighting in the
Carpathians. I did not want to go there anyway. It might be good though.
I could go to Spain if there was no war. The sun was going down and the
day was cooling off. After supper I would go and see Catherine Barkley.
I wished she were here now. I wished I were in Milan with her. I would
like to eat at the Cova and then walk down the Via Manzoni in the hot
evening and cross over and turn off along the canal and go to the hotel
with Catherine Barkley. Maybe she would. Maybe she would pretend that I
was her boy that was killed and we would go in the front door and the
porter would take off his cap and I would stop at the concierge’s desk
and ask for the key and she would stand by the elevator and then we
would get in the elevator and it would go up very slowly clicking at all
the floors and then our floor and the boy would open the door and stand
there and she would step out and I would step out and we would walk down
the hall and I would put the key in the door and open it and go in and
then take down the telephone and ask them to send a bottle of capri
bianca in a silver bucket full of ice and you would hear the ice against
the pail coming down the corridor and the boy would knock and I would
say leave it outside the door please. Because we would not wear any
clothes because it was so hot and the window open and the swallows
flying over the roofs of the houses and when it was dark afterward and
you went to the window very small bats hunting over the houses and close
down over the trees and we would drink the capri and the door locked and
it hot and only a sheet and the whole night and we would both love each
other all night in the hot night in Milan. That was how it ought to be.
I would eat quickly and go and see Catherine Barkley.

They talked too much at the mess and I drank wine because to-night we
were not all brothers unless I drank a little and talked with the priest
about Archbishop Ireland who was, it seemed, a noble man and with whose
injustice, the injustices he had received and in which I participated as
an American, and of which I had never heard, I feigned acquaintance. It
would have been impolite not to have known something of them when I had
listened to such a splendid explanation of their causes which were,
after all, it seemed, misunderstandings. I thought he had a fine name
and he came from Minnesota which made a lovely name: Ireland of
Minnesota, Ireland of Wisconsin, Ireland of Michigan. What made it
pretty was that it sounded like Island. No that wasn’t it. There was
more to it than that. Yes, father. That is true, father. Perhaps,
father. No, father. Well, maybe yes, father. You know more about it than
I do, father. The priest was good but dull. The officers were not good
but dull. The King was good but dull. The wine was bad but not dull. It
took the enamel off your teeth and left it on the roof of your mouth.

“And the priest was locked up,” Rocca said, “because they found the
three per cent bonds on his person. It was in France of course. Here
they would never have arrested him. He denied all knowledge of the five
per cent bonds. This took place at Béziers. I was there and reading of
it in the paper, went to the jail and asked to see the priest. It was
quite evident he had stolen the bonds.”

“I don’t believe a word of this,” Rinaldi said.

“Just as you like,” Rocca said. “But I am telling it for our priest
here. It is very informative. He is a priest; he will appreciate it.”

The priest smiled. “Go on,” he said. “I am listening.”

“Of course some of the bonds were not accounted for but the priest had
all of the three per cent bonds and several local obligations, I forget
exactly what they were. So I went to the jail, now this is the point of
the story, and I stood outside his cell and I said as though I were
going to confession, ‘Bless me, father, for you have sinned.’”

There was great laughter from everybody.

“And what did he say?” asked the priest. Rocca ignored this and went on
to explain the joke to me. “You see the point, don’t you?” It seemed it
was a very funny joke if you understood it properly. They poured me more
wine and I told the story about the English private soldier who was
placed under the shower bath. Then the major told the story of the
eleven Czecho-slovaks and the Hungarian corporal. After some more wine I
told the story of the jockey who found the penny. The major said there
was an Italian story something like that about the duchess who could not
sleep at night. At this point the priest left and I told the story about
the travelling salesman who arrived at five o’clock in the morning at
Marseilles when the mistral was blowing. The major said he had heard a
report that I could drink. I denied this. He said it was true and by the
corpse of Bacchus we would test whether it was true or not. Not Bacchus,
I said. Not Bacchus. Yes, Bacchus, he said. I should drink cup for cup
and glass for glass with Bassi, Fillipo Vincenza. Bassi said no that was
no test because he had already drunk twice as much as I. I said that was
a foul lie and, Bacchus or no Bacchus, Fillipo Vincenza Bassi or Bassi
Fillippo Vicenza had never touched a drop all evening and what was his
name anyway? He said was my name Frederico Enrico or Enrico Federico? I
said let the best man win, Bacchus barred, and the major started us with
red wine in mugs. Half-way through the wine I did not want any more. I
remembered where I was going.

“Bassi wins,” I said. “He’s a better man than I am. I have to go.”

“He does really,” said Rinaldi. “He has a rendezvous. I know all about
it.”

“I have to go.”

“Another night,” said Bassi. “Another night when you feel stronger.” He
slapped me on the shoulder. There were lighted candles on the table. All
the officers were very happy. “Good-night, gentlemen,” I said.

Rinaldi went out with me. We stood outside the door on the patch and he
said, “You’d better not go up there drunk.”

“I’m not drunk, Rinin. Really.”

“You’d better chew some coffee.”

“Nonsense.”

“I’ll get some, baby. You walk up and down.” He came back with a handful
of roasted coffee beans. “Chew those, baby, and God be with you.”

“Bacchus,” I said.

“I’ll walk down with you.”

“I’m perfectly all right.”

We walked along together through the town and I chewed the coffee. At
the gate of the driveway that led up to the British villa, Rinaldi said
good-night.

“Good-night,” I said. “Why don’t you come in?”

He shook his head. “No,” he said, “I like the simpler pleasures.”

“Thank you for the coffee beans.”

“Nothing, baby. Nothing.”

I started down the driveway. The outlines of the cypresses that lined it
were sharp and clear. I looked back and saw Rinaldi standing watching me
and waved to him.

I sat in the reception hall of the villa, waiting for Catherine Barkley
to come down. Some one was coming down the hall-way. I stood up, but it
was not Catherine. It was Miss Ferguson.

“Hello,” she said. “Catherine asked me to tell you she was sorry she
couldn’t see you this evening.”

“I’m so sorry. I hope she’s not ill.”

“She’s not awfully well.”

“Will you tell her how sorry I am?”

“Yes, I will.”

“Do you think it would be any good to try and see her to-morrow?”

“Yes, I do.”

“Thank you very much,” I said. “Good-night.”

I went out the door and suddenly I felt lonely and empty. I had treated
seeing Catherine very lightly, I had gotten somewhat drunk and had
nearly forgotten to come but when I could not see her there I was
feeling lonely and hollow.




                              CHAPTER VIII

The next afternoon we heard there was to be an attack up the river that
night and that we were to take four cars there. Nobody knew anything
about it although they all spoke with great positiveness and strategical
knowledge. I was riding in the first car and as we passed the entry to
the British hospital I told the driver to stop. The other cars pulled
up. I got out and told the driver to go on and that if we had not caught
up to them at the junction of the road to Cormons to wait there. I
hurried up the driveway and inside the reception hall I asked for Miss
Barkley.

“She’s on duty.”

“Could I see her just for a moment?”

They sent an orderly to see and she came back with him.

“I stopped to ask if you were better. They told me you were on duty, so
I asked to see you.”

“I’m quite well,” she said, “I think the heat knocked me over
yesterday.”

“I have to go.”

“I’ll just step out the door a minute.”

“And you’re all right?” I asked outside.

“Yes, darling. Are you coming to-night?”

“No. I’m leaving now for a show up above Plava.”

“A show?”

“I don’t think it’s anything.”

“And you’ll be back?”

“To-morrow.”

She was unclasping something from her neck. She put it in my hand. “It’s
a Saint Anthony,” she said. “And come to-morrow night.”

“You’re not a Catholic, are you?”

“No. But they say a Saint Anthony’s very useful.”

“I’ll take care of him for you. Good-by.”

“No,” she said, “not good-by.”

“All right.”

“Be a good boy and be careful. No, you can’t kiss me here. You can’t.”

“All right.”

I looked back and saw her standing on the steps. She waved and I kissed
my hand and held it out. She waved again and then I was out of the
driveway and climbing up into the seat of the ambulance and we started.
The Saint Anthony was in a little white metal capsule. I opened the
capsule and spilled him out into my hand.

“Saint Anthony?” asked the driver.

“Yes.”

“I have one.” His right hand left the wheel and opened a button on his
tunic and pulled it out from under his shirt.

“See?”

I put my Saint Anthony back in the capsule, spilled the thin gold chain
together and put it all in my breast pocket.

“You don’t wear him?”

“No.”

“It’s better to wear him. That’s what it’s for.”

“All right,” I said. I undid the clasp of the gold chain and put it
around my neck and clasped it. The saint hung down on the outside of my
uniform and I undid the throat of my tunic, unbuttoned the shirt collar
and dropped him in under the shirt. I felt him in his metal box against
my chest while we drove. Then I forgot about him. After I was wounded I
never found him. Some one probably got it at one of the dressing
stations.

We drove fast when we were over the bridge and soon we saw the dust of
the other cars ahead down the road. The road curved and we saw the three
cars looking quite small, the dust rising from the wheels and going off
through the trees. We caught them and passed them and turned off on a
road that climbed up into the hills. Driving in convoy is not unpleasant
if you are the first car and I settled back in the seat and watched the
country. We were in the foot-hills on the near side of the river and as
the road mounted there were the high mountains off to the north with
snow still on the tops. I looked back and saw the three cars all
climbing, spaced by the interval of their dust. We passed a long column
of loaded mules, the drivers walking along beside the mules wearing red
fezzes. They were bersaglieri.

Beyond the mule train the road was empty and we climbed through the
hills and then went down over the shoulder of a long hill into a
river-valley. There were trees along both sides of the road and through
the right line of trees I saw the river, the water clear, fast and
shallow. The river was low and there were stretches of sand and pebbles
with a narrow channel of water and sometimes the water spread like a
sheen over the pebbly bed. Close to the bank I saw deep pools, the water
blue like the sky. I saw arched stone bridges over the river where
tracks turned off from the road and we passed stone farmhouses with pear
trees candelabraed against their south walls and low stone walls in the
fields. The road went up the valley a long way and then we turned off
and commenced to climb into the hills again. The road climbed steeply
going up and back and forth through chestnut woods to level finally
along a ridge. I could look down through the woods and see, far below,
with the sun on it, the line of the river that separated the two armies.
We went along the rough new military road that followed the crest of the
ridge and I looked to the north at the two ranges of mountains, green
and dark to the snow-line and then white and lovely in the sun. Then, as
the road mounted along the ridge, I saw a third range of mountains,
higher snow mountains, that looked chalky white and furrowed, with
strange planes, and then there were mountains far off beyond all these
that you could hardly tell if you really saw. Those were all the
Austrians’ mountains and we had nothing like them. Ahead there was a
rounded turn-off in the road to the right and looking down I could see
the road dropping through the trees. There were troops on this road and
motor trucks and mules with mountain guns and as we went down, keeping
to the side, I could see the river far down below, the line of ties and
rails running along it, the old bridge where the railway crossed to the
other side and across, under a hill beyond the river, the broken houses
of the little town that was to be taken.

It was nearly dark when we came down and turned onto the main road that
ran beside the river.




                               CHAPTER IX

The road was crowded and there were screens of corn-stalk and straw
matting on both sides and matting over the top so that it was like the
entrance at a circus or a native village. We drove slowly in this
matting-covered tunnel and came out onto a bare cleared space where the
railway station had been. The road here was below the level of the river
bank and all along the side of the sunken road there were holes dug in
the bank with infantry in them. The sun was going down and looking up
along the bank as we drove I saw the Austrian observation balloons above
the hills on the other side dark against the sunset. We parked the cars
beyond a brickyard. The ovens and some deep holes had been equipped as
dressing stations. There were three doctors that I knew. I talked with
the major and learned that when it should start and our cars should be
loaded we would drive them back along the screened road and up to the
main road along the ridge where there would be a post and other cars to
clear them. He hoped the road would not jam. It was a one-road show. The
road was screened because it was in sight of the Austrians across the
river. Here at the brickyard we were sheltered from rifle or machine-gun
fire by the river bank. There was one smashed bridge across the river.
They were going to put over another bridge when the bombardment started
and some troops were to cross at the shallows up above at the bend of
the river. The major was a little man with upturned mustaches. He had
been in the war in Libya and wore two wound-stripes. He said that if the
thing went well he would see that I was decorated. I said I hoped it
would go well but that he was too kind. I asked him if there was a big
dugout where the drivers could stay and he sent a soldier to show me. I
went with him and found the dugout, which was very good. The drivers
were pleased with it and I left them there. The major asked me to have a
drink with him and two other officers. We drank rum and it was very
friendly. Outside it was getting dark. I asked what time the attack was
to be and they said as soon as it was dark. I went back to the drivers.
They were sitting in the dugout talking and when I came in they stopped.
I gave them each a package of cigarettes, Macedonias, loosely packed
cigarettes that spilled tobacco and needed to have the ends twisted
before you smoked them. Manera lit his lighter and passed it around. The
lighter was shaped like a Fiat radiator. I told them what I had heard.

“Why didn’t we see the post when we came down?” Passini asked.

“It was just beyond where we turned off.”

“That road will be a dirty mess,” Manera said.

“They’ll shell the —— out of us.”

“Probably.”

“What about eating, lieutenant? We won’t get a chance to eat after this
thing starts.”

“I’ll go and see now,” I said.

“You want us to stay here or can we look around?”

“Better stay here.”

I went back to the major’s dugout and he said the field kitchen would be
along and the drivers could come and get their stew. He would loan them
mess tins if they did not have them. I said I thought they had them. I
went back and told the drivers I would get them as soon as the food
came. Manera said he hoped it would come before the bombardment started.
They were silent until I went out. They were all mechanics and hated the
war.

I went out to look at the cars and see what was going on and then came
back and sat down in the dugout with the four drivers. We sat on the
ground with our backs against the wall and smoked. Outside it was nearly
dark. The earth of the dugout was warm and dry and I let my shoulders
back against the wall, sitting on the small of my back, and relaxed.

“Who goes to the attack?” asked Gavuzzi.

“Bersaglieri.”

“All bersaglieri?”

“I think so.”

“There aren’t enough troops here for a real attack.”

“It is probably to draw attention from where the real attack will be.”

“Do the men know that who attack?”

“I don’t think so.”

“Of course they don’t,” Manera said. “They wouldn’t attack if they did.”

“Yes they would,” Passini said. “Bersaglieri are fools.”

“They are brave and have good discipline,” I said.

“They are big through the chest by measurement, and healthy. But they
are still fools.”

“The granatieri are tall,” Manera said. This was a joke. They all
laughed.

“Were you there, Tenente, when they wouldn’t attack and they shot every
tenth man?”

“No.”

“It is true. They lined them up afterward and took every tenth man.
Carabinieri shot them.”

“Carabinieri,” said Passini and spat on the floor. “But those
grenadiers; all over six feet. They wouldn’t attack.”

“If everybody would not attack the war would be over,” Manera said.

“It wasn’t that way with the granatieri. They were afraid. The officers
all came from such good families.”

“Some of the officers went alone.”

“A sergeant shot two officers who would not get out.”

“Some troops went out.”

“Those that went out were not lined up when they took the tenth men.”

“One of those shot by the carabinieri is from my town,” Passini said.
“He was a big smart tall boy to be in the granatieri. Always in Rome.
Always with the girls. Always with the carabinieri.” He laughed. “Now
they have a guard outside his house with a bayonet and nobody can come
to see his mother and father and sisters and his father loses his civil
rights and cannot even vote. They are all without law to protect them.
Anybody can take their property.”

“If it wasn’t that that happens to their families nobody would go to the
attack.”

“Yes. Alpini would. These V. E. soldiers would. Some bersaglieri.”

“Bersaglieri have run too. Now they try to forget it.”

“You should not let us talk this way, Tenente. Evviva l’esercito,”
Passini said sarcastically.

“I know how you talk,” I said. “But as long as you drive the cars and
behave——”

“—and don’t talk so other officers can hear,” Manera finished.

“I believe we should get the war over,” I said. “It would not finish it
if one side stopped fighting. It would only be worse if we stopped
fighting.”

“It could not be worse,” Passini said respectfully. “There is nothing
worse than war.”

“Defeat is worse.”

“I do not believe it,” Passini said still respectfully. “What is defeat?
You go home.”

“They come after you. They take your home. They take your sisters.”

“I don’t believe it,” Passini said. “They can’t do that to everybody.
Let everybody defend his home. Let them keep their sisters in the
house.”

“They hang you. They come and make you be a soldier again. Not in the
auto-ambulance, in the infantry.”

“They can’t hang every one.”

“An outside nation can’t make you be a soldier,” Manera said. “At the
first battle you all run.”

“Like the Tchecos.”

“I think you do not know anything about being conquered and so you think
it is not bad.”

“Tenente,” Passini said. “We understand you let us talk. Listen. There
is nothing as bad as war. We in the auto-ambulance cannot even realize
at all how bad it is. When people realize how bad it is they cannot do
anything to stop it because they go crazy. There are some people who
never realize. There are people who are afraid of their officers. It is
with them that war is made.”

“I know it is bad but we must finish it.”

“It doesn’t finish. There is no finish to a war.”

“Yes there is.”

Passini shook his head.

“War is not won by victory. What if we take San Gabriele? What if we
take the Carso and Monfalcone and Trieste? Where are we then? Did you
see all the far mountains to-day? Do you think we could take all them
too? Only if the Austrians stop fighting. One side must stop fighting.
Why don’t we stop fighting? If they come down into Italy they will get
tired and go away. They have their own country. But no, instead there is
a war.”

“You’re an orator.”

“We think. We read. We are not peasants. We are mechanics. But even the
peasants know better than to believe in a war. Everybody hates this
war.”

“There is a class that controls a country that is stupid and does not
realize anything and never can. That is why we have this war.”

“Also they make money out of it.”

“Most of them don’t,” said Passini. “They are too stupid. They do it for
nothing. For stupidity.”

“We must shut up,” said Manera. “We talk too much even for the Tenente.”

“He likes it,” said Passini. “We will convert him.”

“But now we will shut up,” Manera said.

“Do we eat yet, Tenente?” Gavuzzi asked.

“I will go and see,” I said. Gordini stood up and went outside with me.

“Is there anything I can do, Tenente? Can I help in any way?” He was the
quietest one of the four. “Come with me if you want,” I said, “and we’ll
see.”

It was dark outside and the long light from the search-lights was moving
over the mountains. There were big search-lights on that front mounted
on camions that you passed sometimes on the roads at night, close behind
the lines, the camion stopped a little off the road, an officer
directing the light and the crew scared. We crossed the brickyard, and
stopped at the main dressing station. There was a little shelter of
green branches outside over the entrance and in the dark the night wind
rustled the leaves dried by the sun. Inside there was a light. The major
was at the telephone sitting on a box. One of the medical captains said
the attack had been put forward an hour. He offered me a glass of
cognac. I looked at the board tables, the instruments shining in the
light, the basins and the stoppered bottles. Gordini stood behind me.
The major got up from the telephone.

“It starts now,” he said. “It has been put back again.”

I looked outside, it was dark and the Austrian search-lights were moving
on the mountains behind us. It was quiet for a moment still, then from
all the guns behind us the bombardment started.

“Savoia,” said the major.

“About the soup, major,” I said. He did not hear me. I repeated it.

“It hasn’t come up.”

A big shell came in and burst outside in the brickyard. Another burst
and in the noise you could hear the smaller noise of the brick and dirt
raining down.

“What is there to eat?”

“We have a little pasta asciutta,” the major said.

“I’ll take what you can give me.”

The major spoke to an orderly who went out of sight in the back and came
back with a metal basin of cold cooked macaroni. I handed it to Gordini.

“Have you any cheese?”

The major spoke grudgingly to the orderly who ducked back into the hole
again and came out with a quarter of a white cheese.

“Thank you very much,” I said.

“You’d better not go out.”

Outside something was set down beside the entrance. One of the two men
who had carried it looked in.

“Bring him in,” said the major. “What’s the matter with you? Do you want
us to come outside and get him?”

The two stretcher-bearers picked up the man under the arms and by the
legs and brought him in.

“Slit the tunic,” the major said.

He held a forceps with some gauze in the end. The two captains took off
their coats. “Get out of here,” the major said to the two
stretcher-bearers.

“Come on,” I said to Gordini.

“You better wait until the shelling is over,” the major said over his
shoulder.

“They want to eat,” I said.

“As you wish.”

Outside we ran across the brickyard. A shell burst short near the river
bank. Then there was one that we did not hear coming until the sudden
rush. We both went flat and with the flash and bump of the burst and the
smell heard the singing off of the fragments and the rattle of falling
brick. Gordini got up and ran for the dugout. I was after him, holding
the cheese, its smooth surface covered with brick dust. Inside the
dugout were the three drivers sitting against the wall, smoking.

“Here, you patriots,” I said.

“How are the cars?” Manera asked.

“All right.”

“Did they scare you, Tenente?”

“You’re damned right,” I said.

I took out my knife, opened it, wiped off the blade and pared off the
dirty outside surface of the cheese. Gavuzzi handed me the basin of
macaroni.

“Start in to eat, Tenente.”

“No,” I said. “Put it on the floor. We’ll all eat.”

“There are no forks.”

“What the hell,” I said in English.

I cut the cheese into pieces and laid them on the macaroni.

“Sit down to it,” I said. They sat down and waited. I put thumb and
fingers into the macaroni and lifted. A mass loosened.

“Lift it high, Tenente.”

I lifted it to arm’s length and the strands cleared. I lowered it into
the mouth, sucked and snapped in the ends, and chewed, then took a bite
of cheese, chewed, and then a drink of the wine. It tasted of rusty
metal. I handed the canteen back to Passini.

“It’s rotten,” he said. “It’s been in there too long. I had it in the
car.”

They were all eating, holding their chins close over the basin, tipping
their heads back, sucking in the ends. I took another mouthful and some
cheese and a rinse of wine. Something landed outside that shook the
earth.

“Four hundred twenty or minnenwerfer,” Gavuzzi said.

“There aren’t any four hundred twenties in the mountains,” I said.

“They have big Skoda guns. I’ve seen the holes.”

“Three hundred fives.”

We went on eating. There was a cough, a noise like a railway engine
starting and then an explosion that shook the earth again.

“This isn’t a deep dugout,” Passini said.

“That was a big trench-mortar.”

“Yes, sir.”

I ate the end of my piece of cheese and took a swallow of wine. Through
the other noise I heard a cough, then came the chuh-chuh-chuh-chuh—then
there was a flash, as when a blast-furnace door is swung open, and a
roar that started white and went red and on and on in a rushing wind. I
tried to breathe but my breath would not come and I felt myself rush
bodily out of myself and out and out and out and all the time bodily in
the wind. I went out swiftly, all of myself, and I knew I was dead and
that it had all been a mistake to think you just died. Then I floated,
and instead of going on I felt myself slide back. I breathed and I was
back. The ground was torn up and in front of my head there was a
splintered beam of wood. In the jolt of my head I heard somebody crying.
I thought somebody was screaming. I tried to move but I could not move.
I heard the machine-guns and rifles firing across the river and all
along the river. There was a great splashing and I saw the star-shells
go up and burst and float whitely and rockets going up and heard the
bombs, all this in a moment, and then I heard close to me some one
saying “Mama Mia! Oh, mama Mia!” I pulled and twisted and got my legs
loose finally and turned around and touched him. It was Passini and when
I touched him he screamed. His legs were toward me and I saw in the dark
and the light that they were both smashed above the knee. One leg was
gone and the other was held by tendons and part of the trouser and the
stump twitched and jerked as though it were not connected. He bit his
arm and moaned, “Oh mama mia, mama Mia,” then, “Dio te salve, Maria. Dio
te salve, Maria. Oh Jesus shoot me Christ shoot me mama mia mama Mia oh
purest lovely Mary shoot me. Stop it. Stop it. Stop it. Oh Jesus lovely
Mary stop it. Oh oh oh oh,” then choking, “Mama mama mia.” Then he was
quiet, biting his arm, the stump of his leg twitching.

“Porta feriti!” I shouted holding my hands cupped. “Porta Feriti!” I
tried to get closer to Passini to try to put a tourniquet on the legs
but I could not move. I tried again and my legs moved a little. I could
pull backward along with my arms and elbows. Passini was quiet now. I
sat beside him, undid my tunic and tried to rip the tail of my shirt. It
would not rip and I bit the edge of the cloth to start it. Then I
thought of his puttees. I had on wool stockings but Passini wore
puttees. All the drivers wore puttees but Passini had only one leg. I
unwound the puttee and while I was doing it I saw there was no need to
try and make a tourniquet because he was dead already. I made sure he
was dead. There were three others to locate. I sat up straight and as I
did so something inside my head moved like the weights on a doll’s eyes
and it hit me inside in back of my eyeballs. My legs felt warm and wet
and my shoes were wet and warm inside. I knew that I was hit and leaned
over and put my hand on my knee. My knee wasn’t there. My hand went in
and my knee was down on my shin. I wiped my hand on my shirt and another
floating light came very slowly down and I looked at my leg and was very
afraid. Oh, God, I said, get me out of here. I knew, however, that there
had been three others. There were four drivers. Passini was dead. That
left three. Some one took hold of me under the arms and somebody else
lifted my legs.

“There are three others,” I said. “One is dead.”

“It’s Manera. We went for a stretcher but there wasn’t any. How are you,
Tenente?”

“Where is Gordini and Gavuzzi?”

“Gordini’s at the post getting bandaged. Gavuzzi has your legs. Hold on
to my neck, Tenente. Are you badly hit?”

“In the leg. How is Gordini?”

“He’s all right. It was a big trench-mortar shell.”

“Passini’s dead.”

“Yes. He’s dead.”

A shell fell close and they both dropped to the ground and dropped me.
“I’m sorry, Tenente,” said Manera. “Hang onto my neck.”

“If you drop me again.”

“It was because we were scared.”

“Are you unwounded?”

“We are both wounded a little.”

“Can Gordini drive?”

“I don’t think so.”

They dropped me once more before we reached the post.

“You sons of bitches,” I said.

“I am sorry, Tenente,” Manera said. “We won’t drop you again.”

Outside the post a great many of us lay on the ground in the dark. They
carried wounded in and brought them out. I could see the light come out
from the dressing station when the curtain opened and they brought some
one in or out. The dead were off to one side. The doctors were working
with their sleeves up to their shoulders and were red as butchers. There
were not enough stretchers. Some of the wounded were noisy but most were
quiet. The wind blew the leaves in the bower over the door of the
dressing station and the night was getting cold. Stretcher-bearers came
in all the time, put their stretchers down, unloaded them and went away.
As soon as I got to the dressing station Manera brought a medical
sergeant out and he put bandages on both my legs. He said there was so
much dirt blown into the wound that there had not been much hemorrhage.
They would take me as soon as possible. He went back inside. Gordini
could not drive, Manera said. His shoulder was smashed and his head was
hurt. He had not felt bad but now the shoulder had stiffened. He was
sitting up beside one of the brick walls. Manera and Gavuzzi each went
off with a load of wounded. They could drive all right. The British had
come with three ambulances and they had two men on each ambulance. One
of their drivers came over to me, brought by Gordini who looked very
white and sick. The Britisher leaned over.

“Are you hit badly?” he asked. He was a tall man and wore steel-rimmed
spectacles.

“In the legs.”

“It’s not serious I hope. Will you have a cigarette?”

“Thanks.”

“They tell me you’ve lost two drivers.”

“Yes. One killed and the fellow that brought you.”

“What rotten luck. Would you like us to take the cars?”

“That’s what I wanted to ask you.”

“We’d take quite good care of them and return them to the Villa. 206
aren’t you?”

“Yes.”

“It’s a charming place. I’ve seen you about. They tell me you’re an
American.”

“Yes.”

“I’m English.”

“No!”

“Yes, English. Did you think I was Italian? There were some Italians
with one of our units.”

“It would be fine if you would take the cars,” I said.

“We’ll be most careful of them,” he straightened up. “This chap of yours
was very anxious for me to see you.” He patted Gordini on the shoulder.
Gordini winced and smiled. The Englishman broke into voluble and perfect
Italian. “Now everything is arranged. I’ve seen your Tenente. We will
take over the two cars. You won’t worry now.” He broke off, “I must do
something about getting you out of here. I’ll see the medical wallahs.
We’ll take you back with us.”

He walked across to the dressing station, stepping carefully among the
wounded. I saw the blanket open, the light came out and he went in.

“He will look after you, Tenente,” Gordini said.

“How are you, Franco?”

“I am all right.” He sat down beside me. In a moment the blanket in
front of the dressing station opened and two stretcher-bearers came out
followed by the tall Englishman. He brought them over to me.

“Here is the American Tenente,” he said in Italian.

“I’d rather wait,” I said. “There are much worse wounded than me. I’m
all right.”

“Come come,” he said. “Don’t be a bloody hero.” Then in Italian: “Lift
him very carefully about the legs. His legs are very painful. He is the
legitimate son of President Wilson.” They picked me up and took me into
the dressing room. Inside they were operating on all the tables. The
little major looked at us furious. He recognized me and waved a forceps.

“Ça va bien?”

“Ça va.”

“I have brought him in,” the tall Englishman said in Italian. “The only
son of the American Ambassador. He can be here until you are ready to
take him. Then I will take him with my first load.” He bent over me.
“I’ll look up their adjutant to do your papers and it will all go much
faster.” He stooped to go under the doorway and went out. The major was
unhooking the forceps now, dropping them in a basin. I followed his
hands with my eyes. Now he was bandaging. Then the stretcher-bearers
took the man off the table.

“I’ll take the American Tenente,” one of the captains said. They lifted
me onto the table. It was hard and slippery. There were many strong
smells, chemical smells and the sweet smell of blood. They took off my
trousers and the medical captain commenced dictating to the
sergeant-adjutant while he worked, “Multiple superficial wounds of the
left and right thigh and left and right knee and right foot. Profound
wounds of right knee and foot. Lacerations of the scalp (he probed—Does
that hurt?—Christ, yes!) with possible fracture of the skull. Incurred
in the line of duty. That’s what keeps you from being court-martialled
for self-inflicted wounds,” he said. “Would you like a drink of brandy?
How did you run into this thing anyway? What were you trying to do?
Commit suicide? Anti-tetanus please, and mark a cross on both legs.
Thank you. I’ll clean this up a little, wash it out, and put on a
dressing. Your blood coagulates beautifully.”

The adjutant, looking up from the paper, “What inflicted the wounds?”

The medical captain, “What hit you?”

Me, with the eyes shut, “A trench mortar shell.”

The captain, doing things that hurt sharply and severing tissue—“Are
you sure?”

Me—trying to lie still and feeling my stomach flutter when the flesh
was cut, “I think so.”

Captain doctor—(interested in something he was finding), “Fragments of
enemy trench-mortar shell. Now I’ll probe for some of this if you like
but it’s not necessary. I’ll paint all this and—Does that sting? Good,
that’s nothing to how it will feel later. The pain hasn’t started yet.
Bring him a glass of brandy. The shock dulls the pain; but this is all
right, you have nothing to worry about if it doesn’t infect and it
rarely does now. How is your head?”

“Good Christ!” I said.

“Better not drink too much brandy then. If you’ve got a fracture you
don’t want inflammation. How does that feel?”

Sweat ran all over me.

“Good Christ!” I said.

“I guess you’ve got a fracture all right. I’ll wrap you up and don’t
bounce your head around.” He bandaged, his hands moving very fast and
the bandage coming taut and sure. “All right, good luck and Vive la
France.”

“He’s an American,” one of the other captains said.

“I thought you said he was a Frenchman. He talks French,” the captain
said. “I’ve known him before. I always thought he was French.” He drank
a half tumbler of cognac. “Bring on something serious. Get some more of
that Anti-tetanus.” The captain waved to me. They lifted me and the
blanket-flap went across my face as we went out. Outside the
sergeant-adjutant knelt down beside me where I lay, “Name?” he asked
softly. “Middle name? First name? Rank? Where born? What class? What
corps?” and so on. “I’m sorry for your head, Tenente. I hope you feel
better. I’m sending you now with the English ambulance.”

“I’m all right,” I said. “Thank you very much.” The pain that the major
had spoken about had started and all that was happening was without
interest or relation. After a while the English ambulance came up and
they put me onto a stretcher and lifted the stretcher up to the
ambulance level and shoved it in. There was another stretcher by the
side with a man on it whose nose I could see, waxy-looking, out of the
bandages. He breathed very heavily. There were stretchers lifted and
slid into the slings above. The tall English driver came around and
looked in, “I’ll take it very easily,” he said. “I hope you’ll be
comfy.” I felt the engine start, felt him climb up into the front seat,
felt the brake come off and the clutch go in, then we started. I lay
still and let the pain ride.

As the ambulance climbed along the road, it was slow in the traffic,
sometimes it stopped, sometimes it backed on a turn, then finally it
climbed quite fast. I felt something dripping. At first it dropped
slowly and regularly, then it pattered into a stream. I shouted to the
driver. He stopped the car and looked in through the hole behind his
seat.

“What is it?”

“The man on the stretcher over me has a hemorrhage.”

“We’re not far from the top. I wouldn’t be able to get the stretcher out
alone.” He started the car. The stream kept on. In the dark I could not
see where it came from the canvas overhead. I tried to move sideways so
that it did not fall on me. Where it had run down under my shirt it was
warm and sticky. I was cold and my leg hurt so that it made me sick.
After a while the stream from the stretcher above lessened and started
to drip again and I heard and felt the canvas above move as the man on
the stretcher settled more comfortably.

“How is he?” the Englishman called back. “We’re almost up.”

“He’s dead I think,” I said.

The drops fell very slowly, as they fall from an icicle after the sun
has gone. It was cold in the car in the night as the road climbed. At
the post on the top they took the stretcher out and put another in and
we went on.




                               CHAPTER X

In the ward at the field hospital they told me a visitor was coming to
see me in the afternoon. It was a hot day and there were many flies in
the room. My orderly had cut paper into strips and tied the strips to a
stick to make a brush that swished the flies away. I watched them settle
on the ceiling. When he stopped swishing and fell asleep they came down
and I blew them away and finally covered my face with my hands and slept
too. It was very hot and when I woke my legs itched. I waked the orderly
and he poured mineral water on the dressings. That made the bed damp and
cool. Those of us that were awake talked across the ward. The afternoon
was a quiet time. In the morning they came to each bed in turn, three
men nurses and a doctor and picked you up out of bed and carried you
into the dressing room so that the beds could be made while we were
having our wounds dressed. It was not a pleasant trip to the dressing
room and I did not know until later that beds could be made with men in
them. My orderly had finished pouring water and the bed felt cool and
lovely and I was telling him where to scratch on the soles of my feet
against the itching when one of the doctors brought in Rinaldi. He came
in very fast and bent down over the bed and kissed me. I saw he wore
gloves.

“How are you, baby? How do you feel? I bring you this—” It was a bottle
of cognac. The orderly brought a chair and he sat down, “and good news.
You will be decorated. They want to get you the medaglia d’argento but
perhaps they can get only the bronze.”

“What for?”

“Because you are gravely wounded. They say if you can prove you did any
heroic act you can get the silver. Otherwise it will be the bronze. Tell
me exactly what happened. Did you do any heroic act?”

“No,” I said. “I was blown up while we were eating cheese.”

“Be serious. You must have done something heroic either before or after.
Remember carefully.”

“I did not.”

“Didn’t you carry anybody on your back? Gordini says you carried several
people on your back but the medical major at the first post declares it
is impossible. He has to sign the proposition for the citation.”

“I didn’t carry anybody. I couldn’t move.”

“That doesn’t matter,” said Rinaldi.

He took off his gloves.

“I think we can get you the silver. Didn’t you refuse to be medically
aided before the others?”

“Not very firmly.”

“That doesn’t matter. Look how you are wounded. Look at your valorous
conduct in asking to go always to the first line. Besides, the operation
was successful.”

“Did they cross the river all right?”

“Enormously. They take nearly a thousand prisoners. It’s in the
bulletin. Didn’t you see it?”

“No.”

“I’ll bring it to you. It is a successful coup de main.”

“How is everything?”

“Splendid. We are all splendid. Everybody is proud of you. Tell me just
exactly how it happened. I am positive you will get the silver. Go on
tell me. Tell me all about it.” He paused and thought. “Maybe you will
get an English medal too. There was an English there. I’ll go and see
him and ask if he will recommend you. He ought to be able to do
something. Do you suffer much? Have a drink. Orderly, go get a
corkscrew. Oh you should see what I did in the removal of three metres
of small intestine and better now than ever. It is one for _The Lancet_.
You do me a translation and I will send it to _The Lancet_. Every day I
am better. Poor dear baby, how do you feel? Where is that damn
corkscrew? You are so brave and quiet I forget you are suffering.” He
slapped his gloves on the edge of the bed.

“Here is the corkscrew, Signor Tenente,” the orderly said.

“Open the bottle. Bring a glass. Drink that, baby. How is your poor
head? I looked at your papers. You haven’t any fracture. That major at
the first post was a hog-butcher. I would take you and never hurt you. I
never hurt anybody. I learn how to do it. Every day I learn to do things
smoother and better. You must forgive me for talking so much, baby. I am
very moved to see you badly wounded. There, drink that. It’s good. It
cost fifteen lire. It ought to be good. Five stars. After I leave here
I’ll go see that English and he’ll get you an English medal.”

“They don’t give them like that.”

“You are so modest. I will send the liaison officer. He can handle the
English.”

“Have you seen Miss Barkley?”

“I will bring her here. I will go now and bring her here.”

“Don’t go,” I said. “Tell me about Gorizia. How are the girls?”

“There are no girls. For two weeks now they haven’t changed them. I
don’t go there any more. It is disgraceful. They aren’t girls; they are
old war comrades.”

“You don’t go at all?”

“I just go to see if there is anything new. I stop by. They all ask for
you. It is a disgrace that they should stay so long that they become
friends.”

“Maybe girls don’t want to go to the front any more.”

“Of course they do. They have plenty of girls. It is just bad
administration. They are keeping them for the pleasure of dugout hiders
in the rear.”

“Poor Rinaldi,” I said. “All alone at the war with no new girls.”

Rinaldi poured himself another glass of the cognac.

“I don’t think it will hurt you, baby. You take it.”

I drank the cognac and felt it warm all the way down. Rinaldi poured
another glass. He was quieter now. He held up the glass. “To your
valorous wounds. To the silver medal. Tell me, baby, when you lie here
all the time in the hot weather don’t you get excited?”

“Sometimes.”

“I can’t imagine lying like that. I would go crazy.”

“You are crazy.”

“I wish you were back. No one to come in at night from adventures. No
one to make fun of. No one to lend me money. No blood brother and
roommate. Why do you get yourself wounded?”

“You can make fun of the priest.”

“That priest. It isn’t me that makes fun of him. It is the captain. I
like him. If you must have a priest have that priest. He’s coming to see
you. He makes big preparations.”

“I like him.”

“Oh, I knew it. Sometimes I think you and he are a little that way. You
know.”

“No, you don’t.”

“Yes, I do sometimes. A little that way like the number of the first
regiment of the Brigata Ancona.”

“Oh, go to hell.”

He stood up and put on his gloves.

“Oh I love to tease you, baby. With your priest and your English girl,
and really you are just like me underneath.”

“No, I’m not.”

“Yes, we are. You are really an Italian. All fire and smoke and nothing
inside. You only pretend to be American. We are brothers and we love
each other.”

“Be good while I’m gone,” I said.

“I will send Miss Barkley. You are better with her without me. You are
purer and sweeter.”

“Oh, go to hell.”

“I will send her. Your lovely cool goddess. English goddess. My God what
would a man do with a woman like that except worship her? What else is
an Englishwoman good for?”

“You are an ignorant foul-mouthed dago.”

“A what?”

“An ignorant wop.”

“Wop. You are a frozen-faced ... wop.”

“You are ignorant. Stupid.” I saw that word pricked him and kept on.
“Uninformed. Inexperienced, stupid from inexperience.”

“Truly? I tell you something about your good women. Your goddesses.
There is only one difference between taking a girl who has always been
good and a woman. With a girl it is painful. That’s all I know.” He
slapped the bed with his glove. “And you never know if the girl will
really like it.”

“Don’t get angry.”

“I’m not angry. I just tell you, baby, for your own good. To save you
trouble.”

“That’s the only difference?”

“Yes. But millions of fools like you don’t know it.”

“You were sweet to tell me.”

“We won’t quarrel, baby. I love you too much. But don’t be a fool.”

“No. I’ll be wise like you.”

“Don’t be angry, baby. Laugh. Take a drink. I must go, really.”

“You’re a good old boy.”

“Now you see. Underneath we are the same. We are war brothers. Kiss me
good-by.”

“You’re sloppy.”

“No. I am just more affectionate.”

I felt his breath come toward me. “Good-by. I come to see you again
soon.” His breath went away. “I won’t kiss you if you don’t want. I’ll
send your English girl. Good-by, baby. The cognac is under the bed. Get
well soon.”

He was gone.




                               CHAPTER XI

It was dusk when the priest came. They had brought the soup and
afterward taken away the bowls and I was lying looking at the rows of
beds and out the window at the tree-top that moved a little in the
evening breeze. The breeze came in through the window and it was cooler
with the evening. The flies were on the ceiling now and on the electric
light bulbs that hung on wires. The lights were only turned on when some
one was brought in at night or when something was being done. It made me
feel very young to have the dark come after the dusk and then remain. It
was like being put to bed after early supper. The orderly came down
between the beds and stopped. Some one was with him. It was the priest.
He stood there small, brown-faced, and embarrassed.

“How do you do?” he asked. He put some packages down by the bed, on the
floor.

“All right, father.”

He sat down in the chair that had been brought for Rinaldi and looked
out of the window embarrassedly. I noticed his face looked very tired.

“I can only stay a minute,” he said. “It is late.”

“It’s not late. How is the mess?”

He smiled. “I am still a great joke,” he sounded tired too. “Thank God
they are all well.”

“I am so glad you are all right,” he said. “I hope you don’t suffer.” He
seemed very tired and I was not used to seeing him tired.

“Not any more.”

“I miss you at the mess.”

“I wish I were there. I always enjoyed our talking.”

“I brought you a few little things,” he said. He picked up the packages.
“This is mosquito netting. This is a bottle of vermouth. You like
vermouth? These are English papers.”

“Please open them.”

He was pleased and undid them. I held the mosquito netting in my hands.
The vermouth he held up for me to see and then put it on the floor
beside the bed. I held up one of the sheaf of English papers. I could
read the headlines by turning it so the half-light from the window was
on it. It was the _News of the World_.

“The others are illustrated,” he said.

“It will be a great happiness to read them. Where did you get them?”

“I sent for them to Mestre. I will have more.”

“You were very good to come, father. Will you drink a glass of
vermouth?”

“Thank you. You keep it. It’s for you.”

“No, drink a glass.”

“All right. I will bring you more then.”

The orderly brought the glasses and opened the bottle. He broke off the
cork and the end had to be shoved down into the bottle. I could see the
priest was disappointed but he said, “That’s all right. It’s no matter.”

“Here’s to your health, father.”

“To your better health.”

Afterward he held the glass in his hand and we looked at one another.
Sometimes we talked and were good friends but to-night it was difficult.

“What’s the matter, father? You seem very tired.”

“I am tired but I have no right to be.”

“It’s the heat.”

“No. This is only the Spring. I feel very low.”

“You have the war disgust.”

“No. But I hate the war.”

“I don’t enjoy it,” I said. He shook his head and looked out of the
window.

“You do not mind it. You do not see it. You must forgive me. I know you
are wounded.”

“That is an accident.”

“Still even wounded you do not see it. I can tell. I do not see it
myself but I feel it a little.”

“When I was wounded we were talking about it. Passini was talking.”

The priest put down the glass. He was thinking about something else.

“I know them because I am like they are,” he said.

“You are different though.”

“But really I am like they are.”

“The officers don’t see anything.”

“Some of them do. Some are very delicate and feel worse than any of us.”

“They are mostly different.”

“It is not education or money. It is something else. Even if they had
education or money men like Passini would not wish to be officers. I
would not be an officer.”

“You rank as an officer. I am an officer.”

“I am not really. You are not even an Italian. You are a foreigner. But
you are nearer the officers than you are to the men.”

“What is the difference?”

“I cannot say it easily. There are people who would make war. In this
country there are many like that. There are other people who would not
make war.”

“But the first ones make them do it.”

“Yes.”

“And I help them.”

“You are a foreigner. You are a patriot.”

“And the ones who would not make war? Can they stop it?”

“I do not know.”

He looked out of the window again. I watched his face.

“Have they ever been able to stop it?”

“They are not organized to stop things and when they get organized their
leaders sell them out.”

“Then it’s hopeless?”

“It is never hopeless. But sometimes I cannot hope. I try always to hope
but sometimes I cannot.”

“Maybe the war will be over.”

“I hope so.”

“What will you do then?”

“If it is possible I will return to the Abruzzi.”

His brown face was suddenly very happy.

“You love the Abruzzi!”

“Yes, I love it very much.”

“You ought to go there then.”

“I would be too happy. If I could live there and love God and serve
Him.”

“And be respected,” I said.

“Yes and be respected. Why not?”

“No reason not. You should be respected.”

“It does not matter. But there in my country it is understood that a man
may love God. It is not a dirty joke.”

“I understand.”

He looked at me and smiled.

“You understand but you do not love God.”

“No.”

“You do not love Him at all?” he asked.

“I am afraid of him in the night sometimes.”

“You should love Him.”

“I don’t love much.”

“Yes,” he said. “You do. What you tell me about in the nights. That is
not love. That is only passion and lust. When you love you wish to do
things for. You wish to sacrifice for. You wish to serve.”

“I don’t love.”

“You will. I know you will. Then you will be happy.”

“I’m happy. I’ve always been happy.”

“It is another thing. You cannot know about it unless you have it.”

“Well,” I said. “If I ever get it I will tell you.”

“I stay too long and talk too much.” He was worried that he really did.

“No. Don’t go. How about loving women? If I really loved some woman
would it be like that?”

“I don’t know about that. I never loved any woman.”

“What about your mother?”

“Yes, I must have loved my mother.”

“Did you always love God?”

“Ever since I was a little boy.”

“Well,” I said. I did not know what to say. “You are a fine boy,” I
said.

“I am a boy,” he said. “But you call me father.”

“That’s politeness.”

He smiled.

“I must go, really,” he said. “You do not want me for anything?” he
asked hopefully.

“No. Just to talk.”

“I will take your greetings to the mess.”

“Thank you for the many fine presents.”

“Nothing.”

“Come and see me again.”

“Yes. Good-by,” he patted my hand.

“So long,” I said in dialect.

“Ciaou,” he repeated.

It was dark in the room and the orderly, who had sat by the foot of the
bed, got up and went out with him. I liked him very much and I hoped he
would get back to the Abruzzi some time. He had a rotten life in the
mess and he was fine about it but I thought how he would be in his own
country. At Capracotta, he had told me, there were trout in the stream
below the town. It was forbidden to play the flute at night. When the
young men serenaded only the flute was forbidden. Why, I had asked.
Because it was bad for the girls to hear the flute at night. The
peasants all called you “Don” and when you met them they took off their
hats. His father hunted every day and stopped to eat at the houses of
peasants. They were always honored. For a foreigner to hunt he must
present a certificate that he had never been arrested. There were bears
on the Gran Sasso D’Italia but it was a long way. Aquila was a fine
town. It was cool in the summer at night and the spring in Abruzzi was
the most beautiful in Italy. But what was lovely was the fall to go
hunting through the chestnut woods. The birds were all good because they
fed on grapes and you never took a lunch because the peasants were
always honored if you would eat with them at their houses. After a while
I went to sleep.




                              CHAPTER XII

The room was long with windows on the right-hand side and a door at the
far end that went into the dressing room. The row of beds that mine was
in faced the windows and another row, under the windows, faced the wall.
If you lay on your left side you could see the dressing room door. There
was another door at the far end that people sometimes came in by. If any
one were going to die they put a screen around the bed so you could not
see them die, but only the shoes and puttees of doctors and men nurses
showed under the bottom of the screen and sometimes at the end there
would be whispering. Then the priest would come out from behind the
screen and afterward the men nurses would go back behind the screen to
come out again carrying the one who was dead with a blanket over him
down the corridor between the beds and some one folded the screen and
took it away.

That morning the major in charge of the ward asked me if I felt that I
could travel the next day. I said I could. He said then they would ship
me out early in the morning. He said I would be better off making the
trip now before it got too hot.

When they lifted you up out of bed to carry you into the dressing room
you could look out of the window and see the new graves in the garden. A
soldier sat outside the door that opened onto the garden making crosses
and painting on them the names, rank, and regiment of the men who were
buried in the garden. He also ran errands for the ward and in his spare
time made me a cigarette lighter out of an empty Austrian rifle
cartridge. The doctors were very nice and seemed very capable. They were
anxious to ship me to Milan where there were better X-ray facilities and
where, after the operation, I could take mechano-therapy. I wanted to go
to Milan too. They wanted to get us all out and back as far as possible
because all the beds were needed for the offensive, when it should
start.

The night before I left the field hospital Rinaldi came in to see me
with the major from our mess. They said that I would go to an American
hospital in Milan that had just been installed. Some American ambulance
units were to be sent down and this hospital would look after them and
any other Americans on service in Italy. There were many in the Red
Cross. The States had declared war on Germany but not on Austria.

The Italians were sure America would declare war on Austria too and they
were very excited about any Americans coming down, even the Red Cross.
They asked me if I thought President Wilson would declare war on Austria
and I said it was only a matter of days. I did not know what we had
against Austria but it seemed logical that they should declare war on
her if they did on Germany. They asked me if we would declare war on
Turkey. I said that was doubtful. Turkey, I said, was our national bird
but the joke translated so badly and they were so puzzled and suspicious
that I said yes, we would probably declare war on Turkey. And on
Bulgaria? We had drunk several glasses of brandy and I said yes by God
on Bulgaria too and on Japan. But, they said, Japan is an ally of
England. You can’t trust the bloody English. The Japanese want Hawaii, I
said. Where is Hawaii? It is in the Pacific Ocean. Why do the Japanese
want it? They don’t really want it, I said. That is all talk. The
Japanese are a wonderful little people fond of dancing and light wines.
Like the French, said the major. We will get Nice and Savoia from the
French. We will get Corsica and all the Adriatic coast-line, Rinaldi
said. Italy will return to the splendors of Rome, said the major. I
don’t like Rome, I said. It is hot and full of fleas. You don’t like
Rome? Yes, I love Rome. Rome is the mother of nations. I will never
forget Romulus suckling the Tiber. What? Nothing. Let’s all go to Rome.
Let’s go to Rome to-night and never come back. Rome is a beautiful city,
said the major. The mother and father of nations, I said. Roma is
feminine, said Rinaldi. It cannot be the father. Who is the father,
then, the Holy Ghost? Don’t blaspheme. I wasn’t blaspheming, I was
asking for information. You are drunk, baby. Who made me drunk? I made
you drunk, said the major. I made you drunk because I love you and
because America is in the war. Up to the hilt, I said. You go away in
the morning, baby, Rinaldi said. To Rome, I said. No, to Milan. To
Milan, said the major, to the Crystal Palace, to the Cova, to Campari’s,
to Biffi’s, to the galleria. You lucky boy. To the Gran Italia I said,
where I will borrow money from George. To the Scala, said Rinaldi. You
will go to the Scala. Every night, I said. You won’t be able to afford
it every night, said the major.

The tickets are very expensive. I will draw a sight draft on my
grandfather, I said. A what? A sight draft. He has to pay or I go to
jail. Mr. Cunningham at the bank does it. I live by sight drafts. Can a
grandfather jail a patriotic grandson who is dying that Italy may live?
Live the American Garibaldi, said Rinaldi. Viva the sight drafts, I
said. We must be quiet, said the major. Already we have been asked many
times to be quiet. Do you go to-morrow really, Federico? He goes to the
American hospital I tell you, Rinaldi said. To the beautiful nurses. Not
the nurses with beards of the field hospital. Yes, yes, said the major,
I know he goes to the American hospital. I don’t mind their beards, I
said. If any man wants to raise a beard let him. Why don’t you raise a
beard, Signor Maggiore? It could not go in a gas mask. Yes it could.
Anything can go in a gas mask. I’ve vomited into a gas mask. Don’t be so
loud, baby, Rinaldi said. We all know you have been at the front. Oh,
you fine baby, what will I do while you are gone? We must go, said the
major. This becomes sentimental. Listen, I have a surprise for you. Your
English. You know? The English you go to see every night at their
hospital? She is going to Milan too. She goes with another to be at the
American hospital. They had not got nurses yet from America. I talked
to-day with the head of their riparto. They have too many women here at
the front. They send some back. How do you like that, baby? All right.
Yes? You go to live in a big city and have your English there to cuddle
you. Why don’t I get wounded? Maybe you will, I said. We must go, said
the major. We drink and make noise and disturb Federico. Don’t go. Yes,
we must go. Good-by. Good luck. Many things. Ciaou. Ciaou. Ciaou. Come
back quickly, baby. Rinaldi kissed me. You smell of lysol. Good-by,
baby. Good-by. Many things. The major patted my shoulder. They tiptoed
out. I found I was quite drunk but went to sleep.



The next day in the morning we left for Milan and arrived forty-eight
hours later. It was a bad trip. We were sidetracked for a long time this
side of Mestre and children came and peeked in. I got a little boy to go
for a bottle of cognac but he came back and said he could only get
grappa. I told him to get it and when it came I gave him the change and
the man beside me and I got drunk and slept until past Vicenza where I
woke up and was very sick on the floor. It did not matter because the
man on that side had been very sick on the floor several times before.
Afterward I thought I could not stand the thirst and in the yards
outside of Verona I called to a soldier who was walking up and down
beside the train and he got me a drink of water. I woke Georgetti, the
other boy who was drunk, and offered him some water. He said to pour it
on his shoulder and went back to sleep. The soldier would not take the
penny I offered him and brought me a pulpy orange. I sucked on that and
spit out the pith and watched the soldier pass up and down past a
freight-car outside and after a while the train gave a jerk and started.




                                BOOK II




                              CHAPTER XIII

We got into Milan early in the morning and they unloaded us in the
freight yard. An ambulance took me to the American hospital. Riding in
the ambulance on a stretcher I could not tell what part of town we were
passing through but when they unloaded the stretcher I saw a
market-place and an open wine shop with a girl sweeping out. They were
watering the street and it smelled of the early morning. They put the
stretcher down and went in. The porter came out with them. He had gray
mustaches, wore a doorman’s cap and was in his shirt sleeves. The
stretcher would not go into the elevator and they discussed whether it
was better to lift me off the stretcher and go up in the elevator or
carry the stretcher up the stairs. I listened to them discussing it.
They decided on the elevator. They lifted me from the stretcher. “Go
easy,” I said. “Take it softly.”

In the elevator we were crowded and as my legs bent the pain was very
bad. “Straighten out the legs,” I said.

“We can’t, Signor Tenente. There isn’t room.” The man who said this had
his arm around me and my arm was around his neck. His breath came in my
face metallic with garlic and red wine.

“Be gentle,” the other man said.

“Son of a bitch who isn’t gentle!”

“Be gentle I say,” the man with my feet repeated.

I saw the doors of the elevator closed, and the grill shut and the
fourth-floor button pushed by the porter. The porter looked worried. The
elevator rose slowly.

“Heavy?” I asked the man with the garlic.

“Nothing,” he said. His face was sweating and he grunted. The elevator
rose steadily and stopped. The man holding the feet opened the door and
stepped out. We were on a balcony. There were several doors with brass
knobs. The man carrying the feet pushed a button that rang a bell. We
heard it inside the doors. No one came. Then the porter came up the
stairs.

“Where are they?” the stretcher-bearers asked.

“I don’t know,” said the porter. “They sleep down stairs.”

“Get somebody.”

The porter rang the bell, then knocked on the door, then he opened the
door and went in. When he came back there was an elderly woman wearing
glasses with him. Her hair was loose and half-falling and she wore a
nurse’s dress.

“I can’t understand,” she said. “I can’t understand Italian.”

“I can speak English,” I said. “They want to put me somewhere.”

“None of the rooms are ready. There isn’t any patient expected.” She
tucked at her hair and looked at me near-sightedly.

“Show them any room where they can put me.”

“I don’t know,” she said. “There’s no patient expected. I couldn’t put
you in just any room.”

“Any room will do,” I said. Then to the porter in Italian, “Find an
empty room.”

“They are all empty,” said the porter. “You are the first patient.” He
held his cap in his hand and looked at the elderly nurse.

“For Christ’s sweet sake take me to some room.” The pain had gone on and
on with the legs bent and I could feel it going in and out of the bone.
The porter went in the door, followed by the gray-haired woman, then
came hurrying back. “Follow me,” he said. They carried me down a long
hallway and into a room with drawn blinds. It smelled of new furniture.
There was a bed and a big wardrobe with a mirror. They laid me down on
the bed.

“I can’t put on sheets,” the woman said. “The sheets are locked up.”

I did not speak to her. “There is money in my pocket,” I said to the
porter. “In the buttoned-down pocket.” The porter took out the money.
The two stretcher-bearers stood beside the bed holding their caps. “Give
them five lire apiece and five lire for yourself. My papers are in the
other pocket. You may give them to the nurse.”

The stretcher-bearers saluted and said thank you. “Good-by,” I said.
“And many thanks.” They saluted again and went out.

“Those papers,” I said to the nurse, “describe my case and the treatment
already given.”

The woman picked them up and looked at them through her glasses. There
were three papers and they were folded. “I don’t know what to do,” she
said. “I can’t read Italian. I can’t do anything without the doctor’s
orders.” She commenced to cry and put the papers in her apron pocket.
“Are you an American?” she asked crying.

“Yes. Please put the papers on the table by the bed.”

It was dim and cool in the room. As I lay on the bed I could see the big
mirror on the other side of the room but could not see what it
reflected. The porter stood by the bed. He had a nice face and was very
kind.

“You can go,” I said to him. “You can go too,” I said to the nurse.
“What is your name?”

“Mrs. Walker.”

“You can go, Mrs. Walker. I think I will go to sleep.”

I was alone in the room. It was cool and did not smell like a hospital.
The mattress was firm and comfortable and I lay without moving, hardly
breathing, happy in feeling the pain lessen. After a while I wanted a
drink of water and found the bell on a cord by the bed and rang it but
nobody came. I went to sleep.

When I woke I looked around. There was sunlight coming in through the
shutters. I saw the big armoire, the bare walls, and two chairs. My legs
in the dirty bandages, stuck straight out in the bed. I was careful not
to move them. I was thirsty and I reached for the bell and pushed the
button. I heard the door open and looked and it was a nurse. She looked
young and pretty.

“Good-morning,” I said.

“Good-morning,” she said and came over to the bed. “We haven’t been able
to get the doctor. He’s gone to Lake Como. No one knew there was a
patient coming. What’s wrong with you anyway?”

“I’m wounded. In the legs and feet and my head is hurt.”

“What’s your name?”

“Henry. Frederic Henry.”

“I’ll wash you up. But we can’t do anything to the dressings until the
doctor comes.”

“Is Miss Barkley here?”

“No. There’s no one by that name here.”

“Who was the woman who cried when I came in?”

The nurse laughed. “That’s Mrs. Walker. She was on night duty and she’d
been asleep. She wasn’t expecting any one.”

While we were talking she was undressing me, and when I was undressed,
except for the bandages, she washed me, very gently and smoothly. The
washing felt very good. There was a bandage on my head but she washed
all around the edge.

“Where were you wounded?”

“On the Isonzo north of Plava.”

“Where is that?”

“North of Gorizia.”

I could see that none of the places meant anything to her.

“Do you have a lot of pain?”

“No. Not much now.”

She put a thermometer in my mouth.

“The Italians put it under the arm,” I said.

“Don’t talk.”

When she took the thermometer out she read it and then shook it.

“What’s the temperature?”

“You’re not supposed to know that.”

“Tell me what it is.”

“It’s almost normal.”

“I never have any fever. My legs are full of old iron too.”

“What do you mean?”

“They’re full of trench-mortar fragments, old screws and bed-springs and
things.”

She shook her head and smiled.

“If you had any foreign bodies in your legs they would set up an
inflammation and you’d have fever.”

“All right,” I said. “We’ll see what comes out.”

She went out of the room and came back with the old nurse of the early
morning. Together they made the bed with me in it. That was new to me
and an admirable proceeding.

“Who is in charge here?”

“Miss Van Campen.”

“How many nurses are there?”

“Just us two.”

“Won’t there be more?”

“Some more are coming.”

“When will they get here?”

“I don’t know. You ask a great many questions for a sick boy.”

“I’m not sick,” I said, “I’m wounded.”

They had finished making the bed and I lay with a clean smooth sheet
under me and another sheet over me. Mrs. Walker went out and came back
with a pajama jacket. They put that on me and I felt very clean and
dressed.

“You’re awfully nice to me,” I said. The nurse called Miss Gage giggled.
“Could I have a drink of water?” I asked.

“Certainly. Then you can have breakfast.”

“I don’t want breakfast. Can I have the shutters opened please?”

The light had been dim in the room and when the shutters were opened it
was bright sunlight and I looked out on a balcony and beyond were the
tile roofs of houses and chimneys. I looked out over the tiled roofs and
saw white clouds and the sky very blue.

“Don’t you know when the other nurses are coming?”

“Why? Don’t we take good care of you?”

“You’re very nice.”

“Would you like to use the bedpan?”

“I might try.”

They helped me and held me up but it was not any use. Afterward I lay
and looked out the open doors onto the balcony.

“When does the doctor come?”

“When he gets back. We’ve tried to telephone to Lake Como for him.”

“Aren’t there any other doctors?”

“He’s the doctor for the hospital.”

Miss Gage brought a pitcher of water and a glass. I drank three glasses
and then they left me and I looked out the window a while and went back
to sleep. I ate some lunch and in the afternoon Miss Van Campen, the
superintendent, came up to see me. She did not like me and I did not
like her. She was small and neatly suspicious and too good for her
position. She asked many questions and seemed to think it was somewhat
disgraceful that I was with the Italians.

“Can I have wine with the meals?” I asked her.

“Only if the doctor prescribes it.”

“I can’t have it until he comes?”

“Absolutely not.”

“You plan on having him come eventually?”

“We’ve telephoned him at Lake Como.”

She went out and Miss Gage came back.

“Why were you rude to Miss Van Campen?” she asked after she had done
something for me very skilfully.

“I didn’t mean to be. But she was snooty.”

“She said you were domineering and rude.”

“I wasn’t. But what’s the idea of a hospital without a doctor?”

“He’s coming. They’ve telephoned for him to Lake Como.”

“What does he do there? Swim?”

“No. He has a clinic there.”

“Why don’t they get another doctor?”

“Hush. Hush. Be a good boy and he’ll come.”

I sent for the porter and when he came I told him in Italian to get me a
bottle of Cinzano at the wine shop, a fiasco of chianti and the evening
papers. He went away and brought them wrapped in newspaper, unwrapped
them and, when I asked him to, drew the corks and put the wine and
vermouth under the bed. They left me alone and I lay in bed and read the
papers awhile, the news from the front, and the list of dead officers
with their decorations and then reached down and brought up the bottle
of Cinzano and held it straight up on my stomach, the cool glass against
my stomach, and took little drinks making rings on my stomach from
holding the bottle there between drinks, and watched it get dark outside
over the roofs of the town. The swallows circled around and I watched
them and the night-hawks flying above the roofs and drank the Cinzano.
Miss Gage brought up a glass with some egg-nog in it. I lowered the
vermouth bottle to the other side of the bed when she came in.

“Miss Van Campen had some sherry put in this,” she said. “You shouldn’t
be rude to her. She’s not young and this hospital is a big
responsibility for her. Mrs. Walker’s too old and she’s no use to her.”

“She’s a splendid woman,” I said. “Thank her very much.”

“I’m going to bring your supper right away.”

“That’s all right,” I said. “I’m not hungry.”

When she brought the tray and put it on the bed table I thanked her and
ate a little of the supper. Afterward it was dark outside and I could
see the beams of the search-lights moving in the sky. I watched for a
while and then went to sleep. I slept heavily except once I woke
sweating and scared and then went back to sleep trying to stay outside
of my dream. I woke for good long before it was light and heard roosters
crowing and stayed on awake until it began to be light. I was tired and
once it was really light I went back to sleep again.




                              CHAPTER XIV

It was bright sunlight in the room when I woke. I thought I was back at
the front and stretched out in bed. My legs hurt me and I looked down at
them still in the dirty bandages, and seeing them knew where I was. I
reached up for the bell-cord and pushed the button. I heard it buzz down
the hall and then some one coming on rubber soles along the hall. It was
Miss Gage and she looked a little older in the bright sunlight and not
so pretty.

“Good-morning,” she said. “Did you have a good night?”

“Yes. Thanks very much,” I said. “Can I have a barber?”

“I came in to see you and you were asleep with this in the bed with
you.”

She opened the armoire door and held up the vermouth bottle. It was
nearly empty. “I put the other bottle from under the bed in there too,”
she said. “Why didn’t you ask me for a glass?”

“I thought maybe you wouldn’t let me have it.”

“I’d have had some with you.”

“You’re a fine girl.”

“It isn’t good for you to drink alone,” she said. “You mustn’t do it.”

“All right.”

“Your friend Miss Barkley’s come,” she said.

“Really?”

“Yes. I don’t like her.”

“You will like her. She’s awfully nice.”

She shook her head. “I’m sure she’s fine. Can you move just a little to
this side? That’s fine. I’ll clean you up for breakfast.” She washed me
with a cloth and soap and warm water. “Hold your shoulder up,” she said.
“That’s fine.”

“Can I have the barber before breakfast?”

“I’ll send the porter for him.” She went out and came back. “He’s gone
for him,” she said and dipped the cloth she held in the basin of water.

The barber came with the porter. He was a man of about fifty with an
upturned mustache. Miss Gage was finished with me and went out and the
barber lathered my face and shaved. He was very solemn and refrained
from talking.

“What’s the matter? Don’t you know any news?” I asked.

“What news?”

“Any news. What’s happened in the town?”

“It is time of war,” he said. “The enemy’s ears are everywhere.”

I looked up at him. “Please hold your face still,” he said and went on
shaving. “I will tell nothing.”

“What’s the matter with you?” I asked.

“I am an Italian. I will not communicate with the enemy.”

I let it go at that. If he was crazy, the sooner I could get out from
under the razor the better. Once I tried to get a good look at him.
“Beware,” he said. “The razor is sharp.”

I paid him when it was over and tipped him half a lira. He returned the
coins.

“I will not. I am not at the front. But I am an Italian.”

“Get the hell out of here.”

“With your permission,” he said and wrapped his razors in newspaper. He
went out leaving the five copper coins on the table beside the bed. I
rang the bell. Miss Gage came in. “Would you ask the porter to come
please?”

“All right.”

The porter came in. He was trying to keep from laughing.

“Is that barber crazy?”

“No, signorino. He made a mistake. He doesn’t understand very well and
he thought I said you were an Austrian officer.”

“Oh,” I said.

“Ho ho ho,” the porter laughed. “He was funny. One move from you he said
and he would have—” he drew his forefinger across his throat.

“Ho ho ho,” he tried to keep from laughing. “When I tell him you were
not an Austrian. Ho ho ho.”

“Ho ho ho,” I said bitterly. “How funny if he would cut my throat. Ho ho
ho.”

“No, signorino. No, no. He was so frightened of an Austrian. Ho ho ho.”

“Ho ho ho,” I said. “Get out of here.”

He went out and I heard him laughing in the hall. I heard some one
coming down the hallway. I looked toward the door. It was Catherine
Barkley.

She came in the room and over to the bed.

“Hello, darling,” she said. She looked fresh and young and very
beautiful. I thought I had never seen any one so beautiful.

“Hello,” I said. When I saw her I was in love with her. Everything
turned over inside of me. She looked toward the door, saw there was no
one, then she sat on the side of the bed and leaned over and kissed me.
I pulled her down and kissed her and felt her heart beating.

“You sweet,” I said. “Weren’t you wonderful to come here?”

“It wasn’t very hard. It may be hard to stay.”

“You’ve got to stay,” I said. “Oh, you’re wonderful.” I was crazy about
her. I could not believe she was really there and held her tight to me.



“You mustn’t,” she said. “You’re not well enough.”

“Yes, I am. Come on.”

“No. You’re not strong enough.”

“Yes. I am. Yes. Please.”

“You do love me?”

“I really love you. I’m crazy about you. Come on please.”

“Feel our hearts beating.”

“I don’t care about our hearts. I want you. I’m just mad about you.”

“You really love me?”

“Don’t keep on saying that. Come on. Please. Please, Catherine.”

“All right but only for a minute.”

“All right,” I said. “Shut the door.”

“You can’t. You shouldn’t.”

“Come on. Don’t talk. Please come on.”



Catherine sat in a chair by the bed. The door was open into the hall.
The wildness was gone and I felt finer than I had ever felt.

She asked, “Now do you believe I love you?”

“Oh, you’re lovely,” I said. “You’ve got to stay. They can’t send you
away. I’m crazy in love with you.”

“We’ll have to be awfully careful. That was just madness. We can’t do
that.”

“We can at night.”

“We’ll have to be awfully careful. You’ll have to be careful in front of
other people.”

“I will.”

“You’ll have to be. You’re sweet. You do love me, don’t you?”

“Don’t say that again. You don’t know what that does to me.”

“I’ll be careful then. I don’t want to do anything more to you. I have
to go now, darling, really.”

“Come back right away.”

“I’ll come when I can.”

“Good-by.”

“Good-by, sweet.”

She went out. God knows I had not wanted to fall in love with her. I had
not wanted to fall in love with any one. But God knows I had and I lay
on the bed in the room of the hospital in Milan and all sorts of things
went through my head but I felt wonderful and finally Miss Gage came in.

“The doctor’s coming,” she said. “He telephoned from Lake Como.”

“When does he get here?”

“He’ll be here this afternoon.”




                               CHAPTER XV

Nothing happened until afternoon. The doctor was a thin quiet little man
who seemed disturbed by the war. He took out a number of small steel
splinters from my thighs with delicate and refined distaste. He used a
local anæsthetic called something or other “snow,” which froze the
tissue and avoided pain until the probe, the scalpel or the forceps got
below the frozen portion. The anæsthetized area was clearly defined by
the patient and after a time the doctor’s fragile delicacy was exhausted
and he said it would be better to have an X-ray. Probing was
unsatisfactory, he said.

The X-ray was taken at the Ospedale Maggiore and the doctor who did it
was excitable, efficient and cheerful. It was arranged by holding up the
shoulders, that the patient should see personally some of the larger
foreign bodies through the machine. The plates were to be sent over. The
doctor requested me to write in his pocket notebook, my name, and
regiment and some sentiment. He declared that the foreign bodies were
ugly, nasty, brutal. The Austrians were sons of bitches. How many had I
killed? I had not killed any but I was anxious to please—and I said I
had killed plenty. Miss Gage was with me and the doctor put his arm
around her and said she was more beautiful than Cleopatra. Did she
understand that? Cleopatra the former queen of Egypt. Yes, by God she
was. We returned to the little hospital in the ambulance and after a
while and much lifting I was upstairs and in bed again. The plates came
that afternoon, the doctor had said by God he would have them that
afternoon and he did. Catherine Barkley showed them to me. They were in
red envelopes and she took them out of the envelopes and held them up to
the light and we both looked.

“That’s your right leg,” she said, then put the plate back in the
envelope. “This is your left.”

“Put them away,” I said, “and come over to the bed.”

“I can’t,” she said. “I just brought them in for a second to show you.”

She went out and I lay there. It was a hot afternoon and I was sick of
lying in bed. I sent the porter for the papers, all the papers he could
get.

Before he came back three doctors came into the room. I have noticed
that doctors who fail in the practice of medicine have a tendency to
seek one another’s company and aid in consultation. A doctor who cannot
take out your appendix properly will recommend to you a doctor who will
be unable to remove your tonsils with success. These were three such
doctors.

“This is the young man,” said the house doctor with the delicate hands.

“How do you do?” said the tall gaunt doctor with the beard. The third
doctor, who carried the X-ray plates in their red envelopes, said
nothing.

“Remove the dressings?” questioned the bearded doctor.

“Certainly. Remove the dressings, please, nurse,” the house doctor said
to Miss Gage. Miss Gage removed the dressings. I looked down at the
legs. At the field hospital they had the look of not too freshly ground
hamburger steak. Now they were crusted and the knee was swollen and
discolored and the calf sunken but there was no pus.

“Very clean,” said the house doctor. “Very clean and nice.”

“Um,” said the doctor with the beard. The third doctor looked over the
house doctor’s shoulder.

“Please move the knee,” said the bearded doctor.

“I can’t.”

“Test the articulation?” the bearded doctor questioned. He had a stripe
beside the three stars on his sleeve. That meant he was a first captain.

“Certainly,” the house doctor said. Two of them took hold of my right
leg very gingerly and bent it.

“That hurts,” I said.

“Yes. Yes. A little further, doctor.”

“That’s enough. That’s as far as it goes,” I said.

“Partial articulation,” said the first captain. He straightened up. “May
I see the plates again, please, doctor?” The third doctor handed him one
of the plates. “No. The left leg, please.”

“That is the left leg, doctor.”

“You are right. I was looking from a different angle.” He returned the
plate. The other plate he examined for some time. “You see, doctor?” he
pointed to one of the foreign bodies which showed spherical and clear
against the light. They examined the plate for some time.

“Only one thing I can say,” the first captain with the beard said. “It
is a question of time. Three months, six months probably.”

“Certainly the synovial fluid must re-form.”

“Certainly. It is a question of time. I could not conscientiously open a
knee like that before the projectile was encysted.”

“I agree with you, doctor.”

“Six months for what?” I asked.

“Six months for the projectile to encyst before the knee can be opened
safely.”

“I don’t believe it,” I said.

“Do you want to keep your knee, young man?”

“No,” I said.

“What?”

“I want it cut off,” I said, “so I can wear a hook on it.”

“What do you mean? A hook?”

“He is joking,” said the house doctor. He patted my shoulder very
delicately. “He wants to keep his knee. This is a very brave young man.
He has been proposed for the silver medal of valor.”

“All my felicitations,” said the first captain. He shook my hand. “I can
only say that to be on the safe side you should wait at least six months
before opening such a knee. You are welcome of course to another
opinion.”

“Thank you very much,” I said. “I value your opinion.”

The first captain looked at his watch.

“We must go,” he said. “All my best wishes.”

“All my best wishes and many thanks,” I said. I shook hands with the
third doctor, “Capitano Varini—Tenente Enry,” and they all three went
out of the room.

“Miss Gage,” I called. She came in. “Please ask the house doctor to come
back a minute.”

He came in holding his cap and stood by the bed. “Did you wish to see
me?”

“Yes. I can’t wait six months to be operated on. My God, doctor, did you
ever stay in bed six months?”

“You won’t be in bed all the time. You must first have the wounds
exposed to the sun. Then afterward you can be on crutches.”

“For six months and then have an operation?”

“That is the safe way. The foreign bodies must be allowed to encyst and
the synovial fluid will re-form. Then it will be safe to open up the
knee.”

“Do you really think yourself I will have to wait that long?”

“That is the safe way.”

“Who is that first captain?”

“He is a very excellent surgeon of Milan.”

“He’s a first captain, isn’t he?”

“Yes, but he is an excellent surgeon.”

“I don’t want my leg fooled with by a first captain. If he was any good
he would be made a major. I know what a first captain is, doctor.”

“He is an excellent surgeon and I would rather have his judgment than
any surgeon I know.”

“Could another surgeon see it?”

“Certainly if you wish. But I would take Dr. Varella’s opinion myself.”

“Could you ask another surgeon to come and see it?”

“I will ask Valentini to come.”

“Who is he?”

“He is a surgeon of the Ospedale Maggiore.”

“Good. I appreciate it very much. You understand, doctor, I couldn’t
stay in bed six months.”

“You would not be in bed. You would first take a sun cure. Then you
could have light exercise. Then when it was encysted we would operate.”

“But I can’t wait six months.”

The doctor spread his delicate fingers on the cap he held and smiled.
“You are in such a hurry to get back to the front?”

“Why not?”

“It is very beautiful,” he said. “You are a noble young man.” He stooped
over and kissed me very delicately on the forehead. “I will send for
Valentini. Do not worry and excite yourself. Be a good boy.”

“Will you have a drink?” I asked.

“No thank you. I never drink alcohol.”

“Just have one.” I rang for the porter to bring glasses.

“No. No thank you. They are waiting for me.”

“Good-by,” I said.

“Good-by.”



Two hours later Dr. Valentini came into the room. He was in a great
hurry and the points of his mustache stood straight up. He was a major,
his face was tanned and he laughed all the time.

“How did you do it, this rotten thing?” he asked. “Let me see the
plates. Yes. Yes. That’s it. You look healthy as a goat. Who’s the
pretty girl? Is she your girl? I thought so. Isn’t this a bloody war?
How does that feel? You are a fine boy. I’ll make you better than new.
Does that hurt? You bet it hurts. How they love to hurt you, these
doctors. What have they done for you so far? Can’t that girl talk
Italian? She should learn. What a lovely girl. I could teach her. I will
be a patient here myself. No, but I will do all your maternity work
free. Does she understand that? She will make you a fine boy. A fine
blonde like she is. That’s fine. That’s all right. What a lovely girl.
Ask her if she eats supper with me. No I won’t take her away from you.
Thank you. Thank you very much, Miss. That’s all.”

“That’s all I want to know.” He patted me on the shoulder. “Leave the
dressings off.”

“Will you have a drink, Dr. Valentini?”

“A drink? Certainly. I will have ten drinks. Where are they?”

“In the armoire. Miss Barkley will get the bottle.”

“Cheery oh. Cheery oh to you, Miss. What a lovely girl. I will bring you
better cognac than that.” He wiped his mustache.

“When do you think it can be operated on?”

“To-morrow morning. Not before. Your stomach must be emptied. You must
be washed out. I will see the old lady downstairs and leave
instructions. Good-by. I see you to-morrow. I’ll bring you better cognac
than that. You are very comfortable here. Good-by. Until to-morrow. Get
a good sleep. I’ll see you early.” He waved from the doorway, his
mustaches went straight up, his brown face was smiling. There was a star
in a box on his sleeve because he was a major.




                              CHAPTER XVI

That night a bat flew into the room through the open door that led onto
the balcony and through which we watched the night over the roofs of the
town. It was dark in our room except for the small light of the night
over the town and the bat was not frightened but hunted in the room as
though he had been outside. We lay and watched him and I do not think he
saw us because we lay so still. After he went out we saw a searchlight
come on and watched the beam move across the sky and then go off and it
was dark again. A breeze came in the night and we heard the men of the
anti-aircraft gun on the next roof talking. It was cool and they were
putting on their capes. I worried in the night about some one coming up
but Catherine said they were all asleep. Once in the night we went to
sleep and when I woke she was not there but I heard her coming along the
hall and the door opened and she came back to the bed and said it was
all right she had been downstairs and they were all asleep. She had been
outside Miss Van Campen’s door and heard her breathing in her sleep. She
brought crackers and we ate them and drank some vermouth. We were very
hungry but she said that would all have to be gotten out of me in the
morning. I went to sleep again in the morning when it was light and when
I was awake I found she was gone again. She came in looking fresh and
lovely and sat on the bed and the sun rose while I had the thermometer
in my mouth and we smelled the dew on the roofs and then the coffee of
the men at the gun on the next roof.

“I wish we could go for a walk,” Catherine said. “I’d wheel you if we
had a chair.”

“How would I get into the chair?”

“We’d do it.”

“We could go out to the park and have breakfast outdoors.” I looked out
the open doorway.

“What we’ll really do,” she said, “is get you ready for your friend Dr.
Valentini.”

“I thought he was grand.”

“I didn’t like him as much as you did. But I imagine he’s very good.”

“Come back to bed, Catherine. Please,” I said.

“I can’t. Didn’t we have a lovely night?”

“And can you be on night duty to-night?”

“I probably will. But you won’t want me.”

“Yes, I will.”

“No, you won’t. You’ve never been operated on. You don’t know how you’ll
be.”

“I’ll be all right.”

“You’ll be sick and I won’t be anything to you.”

“Come back then now.”

“No,” she said. “I have to do the chart, darling, and fix you up.”

“You don’t really love me or you’d come back again.”

“You’re such a silly boy.” She kissed me. “That’s all right for the
chart. Your temperature’s always normal. You’ve such a lovely
temperature.”

“You’ve got a lovely everything.”

“Oh no. You have the lovely temperature. I’m awfully proud of your
temperature.”

“Maybe all our children will have fine temperatures.”

“Our children will probably have beastly temperatures.”

“What do you have to do to get me ready for Valentini?”

“Not much. But quite unpleasant.”

“I wish you didn’t have to do it.”

“I don’t. I don’t want any one else to touch you. I’m silly. I get
furious if they touch you.”

“Even Ferguson?”

“Especially Ferguson and Gage and the other, what’s her name?”

“Walker?”

“That’s it. They’ve too many nurses here now. There must be some more
patients or they’ll send us away. They have four nurses now.”

“Perhaps there’ll be some. They need that many nurses. It’s quite a big
hospital.”

“I hope some will come. What would I do if they sent me away? They will
unless there are more patients.”

“I’d go too.”

“Don’t be silly. You can’t go yet. But get well quickly, darling, and we
will go somewhere.”

“And then what?”

“Maybe the war will be over. It can’t always go on.”

“I’ll get well,” I said. “Valentini will fix me.”

“He should with those mustaches. And, darling, when you’re going under
the ether just think about something else—not us. Because people get
very blabby under an anæsthetic.”

“What should I think about?”

“Anything. Anything but us. Think about your people. Or even any other
girl.”

“No.”

“Say your prayers then. That ought to create a splendid impression.”

“Maybe I won’t talk.”

“That’s true. Often people don’t talk.”

“I won’t talk.”

“Don’t brag, darling. Please don’t brag. You’re so sweet and you don’t
have to brag.”

“I won’t talk a word.”

“Now you’re bragging, darling. You know you don’t need to brag. Just
start your prayers or poetry or something when they tell you to breathe
deeply. You’ll be lovely that way and I’ll be so proud of you. I’m very
proud of you anyway. You have such a lovely temperature and you sleep
like a little boy with your arm around the pillow and think it’s me. Or
is it some other girl? Some fine Italian girl?”

“It’s you.”

“Of course it’s me. Oh I do love you and Valentini will make you a fine
leg. I’m glad I don’t have to watch it.”

“And you’ll be on night duty to-night.”

“Yes. But you won’t care.”

“You wait and see.”

“There, darling. Now you’re all clean inside and out. Tell me. How many
people have you ever loved?”

“Nobody.”

“Not me even?”

“Yes, you.”

“How many others really?”

“None.”

“How many have you—how do you say it?—stayed with?”

“None.”

“You’re lying to me.”

“Yes.”

“It’s all right. Keep right on lying to me. That’s what I want you to
do. Were they pretty?”

“I never stayed with any one.”

“That’s right. Were they very attractive?”

“I don’t know anything about it.”

“You’re just mine. That’s true and you’ve never belonged to any one
else. But I don’t care if you have. I’m not afraid of them. But don’t
tell me about them. When a man stays with a girl when does she say how
much it costs?”

“I don’t know.”

“Of course not. Does she say she loves him? Tell me that. I want to know
that.”

“Yes. If he wants her to.”

“Does he say he loves her? Tell me please. It’s important.”

“He does if he wants to.”

“But you never did? Really?”

“No.”

“Not really. Tell me the truth?”

“No,” I lied.

“You wouldn’t,” she said. “I knew you wouldn’t. Oh, I love you,
darling.”

Outside the sun was up over the roofs and I could see the points of the
cathedral with the sunlight on them. I was clean inside and outside and
waiting for the doctor.

“And that’s it?” Catherine said. “She says just what he wants her to?”

“Not always.”

“But I will. I’ll say just what you wish and I’ll do what you wish and
then you will never want any other girls, will you?” She looked at me
very happily. “I’ll do what you want and say what you want and then I’ll
be a great success, won’t I?”

“Yes.”

“What would you like me to do now that you’re all ready?”

“Come to the bed again.”

“All right. I’ll come.”

“Oh, darling, darling, darling,” I said.

“You see,” she said. “I do anything you want.”

“You’re so lovely.”

“I’m afraid I’m not very good at it yet.”

“You’re lovely.”

“I want what you want. There isn’t any me any more. Just what you want.”

“You sweet.”

“I’m good. Aren’t I good? You don’t want any other girls, do you?”

“No.”

“You see? I’m good. I do what you want.”




                              CHAPTER XVII

When I was awake after the operation I had not been away. You do not go
away. They only choke you. It is not like dying it is just a chemical
choking so you do not feel, and afterward you might as well have been
drunk except that when you throw up nothing comes but bile and you do
not feel better afterward. I saw sandbags at the end of the bed. They
were on pipes that came out of the cast. After a while I saw Miss Gage
and she said, “How is it now?”

“Better,” I said.

“He did a wonderful job on your knee.”

“How long did it take?”

“Two hours and a half.”

“Did I say anything silly?”

“Not a thing. Don’t talk. Just be quiet.”

I was sick and Catherine was right. It did not make any difference who
was on night duty.



There were three other patients in the hospital now, a thin boy in the
Red Cross from Georgia with malaria, a nice boy, also thin, from New
York, with malaria and jaundice, and a fine boy who had tried to unscrew
the fuse-cap from a combination shrapnel and high explosive shell for a
souvenir. This was a shrapnel shell used by the Austrians in the
mountains with a nose-cap which went on after the burst and exploded on
contact.

Catherine Barkley was greatly liked by the nurses because she would do
night duty indefinitely. She had quite a little work with the malaria
people, the boy who had unscrewed the nose-cap was a friend of ours and
never rang at night, unless it was necessary but between the times of
working we were together. I loved her very much and she loved me. I
slept in the daytime and we wrote notes during the day when we were
awake and sent them by Ferguson. Ferguson was a fine girl. I never
learned anything about her except that she had a brother in the
Fifty-Second Division and a brother in Mesopotamia and she was very good
to Catherine Barkley.

“Will you come to our wedding, Fergy?” I said to her once.

“You’ll never get married.”

“We will.”

“No you won’t.”

“Why not?”

“You’ll fight before you’ll marry.”

“We never fight.”

“You’ve time yet.”

“We don’t fight.”

“You’ll die then. Fight or die. That’s what people do. They don’t
marry.”

I reached for her hand. “Don’t take hold of me,” she said. “I’m not
crying. Maybe you’ll be all right you two. But watch out you don’t get
her in trouble. You get her in trouble and I’ll kill you.”

“I won’t get her in trouble.”

“Well watch out then. I hope you’ll be all right. You have a good time.”

“We have a fine time.”

“Don’t fight then and don’t get her into trouble.”

“I won’t.”

“Mind you watch out. I don’t want her with any of these war babies.”

“You’re a fine girl, Fergy.”

“I’m not. Don’t try to flatter me. How does your leg feel?”

“Fine.”

“How is your head?” She touched the top of it with her fingers. It was
sensitive like a foot that had gone to sleep. “It’s never bothered me.”

“A bump like that could make you crazy. It never bothers you?”

“No.”

“You’re a lucky young man. Have you the letter done? I’m going down.”

“It’s here,” I said.

“You ought to ask her not to do night duty for a while. She’s getting
very tired.”

“All right. I will.”

“I want to do it but she won’t let me. The others are glad to let her
have it. You might give her just a little rest.”

“All right.”

“Miss Van Campen spoke about you sleeping all the forenoons.”

“She would.”

“It would be better if you let her stay off nights a little while.”

“I want her to.”

“You do not. But if you would make her I’d respect you for it.”

“I’ll make her.”

“I don’t believe it.” She took the note and went out. I rang the bell
and in a little while Miss Gage came in.

“What’s the matter?”

“I just wanted to talk to you. Don’t you think Miss Barkley ought to go
off night duty for a while? She looks awfully tired. Why does she stay
on so long?”

Miss Gage looked at me.

“I’m a friend of yours,” she said. “You don’t have to talk to me like
that.”

“What do you mean?”

“Don’t be silly. Was that all you wanted?”

“Do you want a vermouth?”

“All right. Then I have to go.” She got out the bottle from the armoire
and brought a glass.

“You take the glass,” I said. “I’ll drink out of the bottle.”

“Here’s to you,” said Miss Gage.

“What did Van Campen say about me sleeping late in the mornings?”

“She just jawed about it. She calls you our privileged patient.”

“To hell with her.”

“She isn’t mean,” Miss Gage said. “She’s just old and cranky. She never
liked you.”

“No.”

“Well, I do. And I’m your friend. Don’t forget that.”

“You’re awfully damned nice.”

“No. I know who you think is nice. But I’m your friend. How does your
leg feel?”

“Fine.”

“I’ll bring some cold mineral water to pour over it. It must itch under
the cast. It’s hot outside.”

“You’re awful nice.”

“Does it itch much?”

“No. It’s fine.”

“I’ll fix those sandbags better.” She leaned over. “I’m your friend.”

“I know you are.”

“No you don’t. But you will some day.”

Catherine Barkley took three nights off night duty and then she came
back on again. It was as though we met again after each of us had been
away on a long journey.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

We had a lovely time that summer. When I could go out we rode in a
carriage in the park. I remember the carriage, the horse going slowly,
and up ahead the back of the driver with his varnished high hat, and
Catherine Barkley sitting beside me. If we let our hands touch, just the
side of my hand touching hers, we were excited. Afterward when I could
get around on crutches we went to dinner at Biffi’s or the Gran Italia
and sat at the tables outside on the floor of the galleria. The waiters
came in and out and there were people going by and candles with shades
on the tablecloths and after we decided that we liked the Gran Italia
best, George, the head-waiter, saved us a table. He was a fine waiter
and we let him order the meal while we looked at the people, and the
great galleria in the dusk, and each other. We drank dry white capri
iced in a bucket; although we tried many of the other wines, fresa,
barbera and the sweet white wines. They had no wine waiter because of
the war and George would smile ashamedly when I asked about wines like
fresa.

“If you imagine a country that makes a wine because it tastes like
strawberries,” he said.

“Why shouldn’t it?” Catherine asked. “It sounds splendid.”

“You try it, lady,” said George, “if you want to. But let me bring a
little bottle of margaux for the Tenente.”

“I’ll try it too, George.”

“Sir, I can’t recommend you to. It doesn’t even taste like
strawberries.”

“It might,” said Catherine. “It would be wonderful if it did.”

“I’ll bring it,” said George, “and when the Lady is satisfied I’ll take
it away.”

It was not much of a wine. As he said, it did not even taste like
strawberries. We went back to capri. One evening I was short of money
and George loaned me a hundred lire. “That’s all right, Tenente,” he
said. “I know how it is. I know how a man gets short. If you or the lady
need money I’ve always got money.”

After dinner we walked through the galleria, past the other restaurants
and the shops with their steel shutters down, and stopped at the little
place where they sold sandwiches; ham and lettuce sandwiches and anchovy
sandwiches made of very tiny brown glazed rolls and only about as long
as your finger. They were to eat in the night when we were hungry. Then
we got into an open carriage outside the galleria in front of the
cathedral and rode to the hospital. At the door of the hospital the
porter came out to help with the crutches. I paid the driver, and then
we rode upstairs in the elevator. Catherine got off at the lower floor
where the nurses lived and I went on up and went down the hall on
crutches to my room; sometimes I undressed and got into bed and
sometimes I sat out on the balcony with my leg up on another chair and
watched the swallows over the roofs and waited for Catherine. When she
came upstairs it was as though she had been away on a long trip and I
went along the hall with her on the crutches and carried the basins and
waited outside the doors, or went in with her; it depending on whether
they were friends of ours or not, and when she had done all there was to
be done we sat out on the balcony outside my room. Afterward I went to
bed and when they were all asleep and she was sure they would not call
she came in. I loved to take her hair down and she sat on the bed and
kept very still, except suddenly she would dip down to kiss me while I
was doing it, and I would take out the pins and lay them on the sheet
and it would be loose and I would watch her while she kept very still
and then take out the last two pins and it would all come down and she
would drop her head and we would both be inside of it, and it was the
feeling of inside a tent or behind a falls.

She had wonderfully beautiful hair and I would lie sometimes and watch
her twisting it up in the light that came in the open door and it shone
even in the night as water shines sometimes just before it is really
daylight. She had a lovely face and body and lovely smooth skin too. We
would be lying together and I would touch her cheeks and her forehead
and under her eyes and her chin and throat with the tips of my fingers
and say, “Smooth as piano keys,” and she would stroke my chin with her
finger and say, “Smooth as emery paper and very hard on piano keys.”

“Is it rough?”

“No, darling. I was just making fun of you.”

It was lovely in the nights and if we could only touch each other we
were happy. Besides all the big times we had many small ways of making
love and we tried putting thoughts in the other one’s head while we were
in different rooms. It seemed to work sometimes but that was probably
because we were thinking the same thing anyway.

We said to each other that we were married the first day she had come to
the hospital and we counted months from our wedding day. I wanted to be
really married but Catherine said that if we were they would send her
away and if we merely started on the formalities they would watch her
and would break us up. We would have to be married under Italian law and
the formalities were terrific. I wanted us to be married really because
I worried about having a child if I thought about it, but we pretended
to ourselves we were married and did not worry much and I suppose I
enjoyed not being married, really. I know one night we talked about it
and Catherine said, “But, darling, they’d send me away.”

“Maybe they wouldn’t.”

“They would. They’d send me home and then we would be apart until after
the war.”

“I’d come on leave.”

“You couldn’t get to Scotland and back on a leave. Besides, I won’t
leave you. What good would it do to marry now? We’re really married. I
couldn’t be any more married.”

“I only wanted to for you.”

“There isn’t any me. I’m you. Don’t make up a separate me.”

“I thought girls always wanted to be married.”

“They do. But, darling, I am married. I’m married to you. Don’t I make
you a good wife?”

“You’re a lovely wife.”

“You see, darling, I had one experience of waiting to be married.”

“I don’t want to hear about it.”

“You know I don’t love any one but you. You shouldn’t mind because some
one else loved me.”

“I do.”

“You shouldn’t be jealous of some one who’s dead when you have
everything.”

“No, but I don’t want to hear about it.”

“Poor darling. And I know you’ve been with all kinds of girls and it
doesn’t matter to me.”

“Couldn’t we be married privately some way? Then if anything happened to
me or if you had a child.”

“There’s no way to be married except by church or state. We are married
privately. You see, darling, it would mean everything to me if I had any
religion. But I haven’t any religion.”

“You gave me the Saint Anthony.”

“That was for luck. Some one gave it to me.”

“Then nothing worries you?”

“Only being sent away from you. You’re my religion. You’re all I’ve
got.”

“All right. But I’ll marry you the day you say.”

“Don’t talk as though you had to make an honest woman of me, darling.
I’m a very honest woman. You can’t be ashamed of something if you’re
only happy and proud of it. Aren’t you happy?”

“But you won’t ever leave me for some one else.”

“No, darling. I won’t ever leave you for some one else. I suppose all
sorts of dreadful things will happen to us. But you don’t have to worry
about that.”

“I don’t. But I love you so much and you did love some one else before.”

“And what happened to him?”

“He died.”

“Yes and if he hadn’t I wouldn’t have met you. I’m not unfaithful,
darling. I’ve plenty of faults but I’m very faithful. You’ll be sick of
me I’ll be so faithful.”

“I’ll have to go back to the front pretty soon.”

“We won’t think about that until you go. You see I’m happy, darling, and
we have a lovely time. I haven’t been happy for a long time and when I
met you perhaps I was nearly crazy. Perhaps I was crazy. But now we’re
happy and we love each other. Do let’s please just be happy. You are
happy, aren’t you? Is there anything I do you don’t like? Can I do
anything to please you? Would you like me to take down my hair? Do you
want to play?”

“Yes and come to bed.”

“All right. I’ll go and see the patients first.”




                              CHAPTER XIX

The summer went that way. I do not remember much about the days, except
that they were hot and that there were many victories in the papers. I
was very healthy and my legs healed quickly so that it was not very long
after I was first on crutches before I was through with them and walking
with a cane. Then I started treatments at the Ospedale Maggiore for
bending the knees, mechanical treatments, baking in a box of mirrors
with violet rays, massage, and baths. I went over there afternoons and
afterward stopped at the café and had a drink and read the papers. I did
not roam around the town; but wanted to get home to the hospital from
the café. All I wanted was to see Catherine. The rest of the time I was
glad to kill. Mostly I slept in the mornings, and in the afternoons,
sometimes, I went to the races, and late to the mechano-therapy
treatments. Sometimes I stopped in at the Anglo-American Club and sat in
a deep leather-cushioned chair in front of the window and read the
magazines. They would not let us go out together when I was off crutches
because it was unseemly for a nurse to be seen unchaperoned with a
patient who did not look as though he needed attendance, so we were not
together much in the afternoons. Although sometimes we could go out to
dinner if Ferguson went along. Miss Van Campen had accepted the status
that we were great friends because she got a great amount of work out of
Catherine. She thought Catherine came from very good people and that
prejudiced her in her favor finally. Miss Van Campen admired family very
much and came from an excellent family herself. The hospital was quite
busy, too, and that kept her occupied. It was a hot summer and I knew
many people in Milan but always was anxious to get back home to the
hospital as soon as the afternoon was over. At the front they were
advancing on the Carso, they had taken Kuk across from Plava and were
taking the Bainsizza plateau. The West front did not sound so good. It
looked as though the war were going on for a long time. We were in the
war now but I thought it would take a year to get any great amount of
troops over and train them for combat. Next year would be a bad year, or
a good year maybe. The Italians were using up an awful amount of men. I
did not see how it could go on. Even if they took all the Bainsizza and
Monte San Gabriele there were plenty of mountains beyond for the
Austrians. I had seen them. All the highest mountains were beyond. On
the Carso they were going forward but there were marshes and swamps down
by the sea. Napoleon would have whipped the Austrians on the plains. He
never would have fought them in the mountains. He would have let them
come down and whipped them around Verona. Still nobody was whipping any
one on the Western front. Perhaps wars weren’t won any more. Maybe they
went on forever. Maybe it was another Hundred Years’ War. I put the
paper back on the rack and left the club. I went down the steps
carefully and walked up the Via Manzoni. Outside the Gran Hotel I met
old Meyers and his wife getting out of a carriage. They were coming back
from the races. She was a big-busted woman in black satin. He was short
and old, with a white mustache and walked flat-footed with a cane.

“How do you do? How do you do?” She shook hands. “Hello,” said Meyers.

“How were the races?”

“Fine. They were just lovely. I had three winners.”

“How did you do?” I asked Meyers.

“All right. I had a winner.”

“I never know how he does,” Mrs. Meyers said. “He never tells me.”

“I do all right,” Meyers said. He was being cordial. “You ought to come
out.” While he talked you had the impression that he was not looking at
you or that he mistook you for some one else.

“I will,” I said.

“I’m coming up to the hospital to see you,” Mrs. Meyers said. “I have
some things for my boys. You’re all my boys. You certainly are my dear
boys.”

“They’ll be glad to see you.”

“Those dear boys. You too. You’re one of my boys.”

“I have to get back,” I said.

“You give my love to all those dear boys. I’ve got lots of things to
bring. I’ve some fine Marsala and cakes.”

“Good-by,” I said. “They’ll be awfully glad to see you.”

“Good-by,” said Meyers. “You come around to the galleria. You know where
my table is. We’re all there every afternoon.” I went on up the street.
I wanted to buy something at the Cova to take to Catherine. Inside, at
the Cova, I bought a box of chocolate and while the girl wrapped it up I
walked over to the bar. There were a couple of British and some
aviators. I had a martini alone, paid for it, picked up the box of
chocolate at the outside counter and walked on home toward the hospital.
Outside the little bar up the street from the Scala there were some
people I knew, a vice-consul, two fellows who studied singing, and
Ettore Moretti, an Italian from San Francisco who was in the Italian
army. I had a drink with them. One of the singers was named Ralph
Simmons, and he was singing under the name of Enrico DelCredo. I never
knew how well he could sing but he was always on the point of something
very big happening. He was fat and looked shopworn around the nose and
mouth as though he had hayfever. He had come back from singing in
Piacenza. He had sung Tosca and it had been wonderful.

“Of course you’ve never heard me sing,” he said.

“When will you sing here?”

“I’ll be at the Scala in the fall.”

“I’ll bet they throw the benches at you,” Ettore said. “Did you hear how
they threw the benches at him in Modena?”

“It’s a damned lie.”

“They threw the benches at him,” Ettore said. “I was there. I threw six
benches myself.”

“You’re just a wop from Frisco.”

“He can’t pronounce Italian,” Ettore said. “Everywhere he goes they
throw the benches at him.”

“Piacenza’s the toughest house to sing in the north of Italy,” the other
tenor said. “Believe me that’s a tough little house to sing.” This
tenor’s name was Edgar Saunders, and he sang under the name of Edouardo
Giovanni.

“I’d like to be there to see them throw the benches at you,” Ettore
said. “You can’t sing Italian.”

“He’s a nut,” said Edgar Saunders. “All he knows how to say is throw
benches.”

“That’s all they know how to do when you two sing,” Ettore said. “Then
when you go to America you’ll tell about your triumphs at the Scala.
They wouldn’t let you get by the first note at the Scala.”

“I’ll sing at the Scala,” Simmons said. “I’m going to sing Tosca in
October.”

“We’ll go, won’t we, Mac?” Ettore said to the vice-consul. “They’ll need
somebody to protect them.”

“Maybe the American army will be there to protect them,” the vice-consul
said. “Do you want another drink, Simmons? You want a drink, Saunders?”

“All right,” said Saunders.

“I hear you’re going to get the silver medal,” Ettore said to me. “What
kind of citation you going to get?”

“I don’t know. I don’t know I’m going to get it.”

“You’re going to get it. Oh boy, the girls at the Cova will think you’re
fine then. They’ll all think you killed two hundred Austrians or
captured a whole trench by yourself. Believe me, I got to work for my
decorations.”

“How many have you got, Ettore?” asked the vice-consul.

“He’s got everything,” Simmons said. “He’s the boy they’re running the
war for.”

“I’ve got the bronze twice and three silver medals,” said Ettore. “But
the papers on only one have come through.”

“What’s the matter with the others?” asked Simmons.

“The action wasn’t successful,” said Ettore. “When the action isn’t
successful they hold up all the medals.”

“How many times have you been wounded, Ettore?”

“Three times bad. I got three wound stripes. See?” He pulled his sleeve
around. The stripes were parallel silver lines on a black background
sewed to the cloth of the sleeve about eight inches below the shoulder.

“You got one too,” Ettore said to me. “Believe me they’re fine to have.
I’d rather have them than medals. Believe me, boy, when you get three
you’ve got something. You only get one for a wound that puts you three
months in the hospital.”

“Where were you wounded, Ettore?” asked the vice-consul.

Ettore pulled up his sleeve. “Here,” he showed the deep smooth red scar.
“Here on my leg. I can’t show you that because I got puttees on; and in
the foot. There’s dead bone in my foot that stinks right now. Every
morning I take new little pieces out and it stinks all the time.”

“What hit you?” asked Simmons.

“A hand-grenade. One of those potato mashers. It just blew the whole
side of my foot off. You know those potato mashers?” He turned to me.

“Sure.”

“I saw the son of a bitch throw it,” Ettore said. “It knocked me down
and I thought I was dead all right but those damn potato mashers haven’t
got anything in them. I shot the son of a bitch with my rifle. I always
carry a rifle so they can’t tell I’m an officer.”

“How did he look?” asked Simmons.

“That was the only one he had,” Ettore said. “I don’t know why he threw
it. I guess he always wanted to throw one. He never saw any real
fighting probably. I shot the son of a bitch all right.”

“How did he look when you shot him?” Simmons asked.

“Hell, how should I know,” said Ettore. “I shot him in the belly. I was
afraid I’d miss him if I shot him in the head.”

“How long have you been an officer, Ettore?” I asked.

“Two years. I’m going to be a captain. How long have you been a
lieutenant?”

“Going on three years.”

“You can’t be a captain because you don’t know the Italian language well
enough,” Ettore said. “You can talk but you can’t read and write well
enough. You got to have an education to be a captain. Why don’t you go
in the American army?”

“Maybe I will.”

“I wish to God I could. Oh, boy, how much does a captain get, Mac?”

“I don’t know exactly. Around two hundred and fifty dollars, I think.”

“Jesus Christ what I could do with two hundred and fifty dollars. You
better get in the American army quick, Fred. See if you can’t get me
in.”

“All right.”

“I can command a company in Italian. I could learn it in English easy.”

“You’d be a general,” said Simmons.

“No, I don’t know enough to be a general. A general’s got to know a hell
of a lot. You guys think there ain’t anything to war. You ain’t got
brains enough to be a second-class corporal.”

“Thank God I don’t have to be,” Simmons said.

“Maybe you will if they round up all you slackers. Oh, boy, I’d like to
have you two in my platoon. Mac too. I’d make you my orderly, Mac.”

“You’re a great boy, Ettore,” Mac said. “But I’m afraid you’re a
militarist.”

“I’ll be a colonel before the war’s over,” Ettore said.

“If they don’t kill you.”

“They won’t kill me.” He touched the stars at his collar with his thumb
and forefinger. “See me do that? We always touch our stars if anybody
mentions getting killed.”

“Let’s go, Sim,” said Saunders standing up.

“All right.”

“So long,” I said. “I have to go too.” It was a quarter to six by the
clock inside the bar. “Ciaou, Ettore.”

“Ciaou, Fred,” said Ettore. “That’s pretty fine you’re going to get the
silver medal.”

“I don’t know I’ll get it.”

“You’ll get it all right, Fred. I heard you were going to get it all
right.”

“Well, so long,” I said. “Keep out of trouble, Ettore.”

“Don’t worry about me. I don’t drink and I don’t run around. I’m no
boozer and whorehound. I know what’s good for me.”

“So long,” I said. “I’m glad you’re going to be promoted captain.”

“I don’t have to wait to be promoted. I’m going to be a captain for
merit of war. You know. Three stars with the crossed swords and crown
above. That’s me.”

“Good luck.”

“Good luck. When you going back to the front?”

“Pretty soon.”

“Well, I’ll see you around.”

“So long.”

“So long. Don’t take any bad nickels.”

I walked on down a back street that led to a cross-cut to the hospital.
Ettore was twenty-three. He had been brought up by an uncle in San
Francisco and was visiting his father and mother in Torino when war was
declared. He had a sister, who had been sent to America with him at the
same time to live with the uncle, who would graduate from normal school
this year. He was a legitimate hero who bored every one he met.
Catherine could not stand him.

“We have heroes too,” she said. “But usually, darling, they’re much
quieter.”

“I don’t mind him.”

“I wouldn’t mind him if he wasn’t so conceited and didn’t bore me, and
bore me, and bore me.”

“He bores me.”

“You’re sweet to say so, darling. But you don’t need to. You can picture
him at the front and you know he’s useful but he’s so much the type of
boy I don’t care for.”

“I know.”

“You’re awfully sweet to know, and I try and like him but he’s a
dreadful, dreadful boy really.”

“He said this afternoon he was going to be a captain.”

“I’m glad,” said Catherine. “That should please him.”

“Wouldn’t you like me to have some more exalted rank?”

“No, darling. I only want you to have enough rank so that we’re admitted
to the better restaurants.”

“That’s just the rank I have.”

“You have a splendid rank. I don’t want you to have any more rank. It
might go to your head. Oh, darling, I’m awfully glad you’re not
conceited. I’d have married you even if you were conceited but it’s very
restful to have a husband who’s not conceited.”

We were talking softly out on the balcony. The moon was supposed to rise
but there was a mist over the town and it did not come up and in a
little while it started to drizzle and we came in. Outside the mist
turned to rain and in a little while it was raining hard and we heard it
drumming on the roof. I got up and stood at the door to see if it was
raining in but it wasn’t, so I left the door open.

“Who else did you see?” Catherine asked.

“Mr. and Mrs. Meyers.”

“They’re a strange lot.”

“He’s supposed to have been in the penitentiary at home. They let him
out to die.”

“And he lived happily in Milan forever after.”

“I don’t know how happily.”

“Happily enough after jail I should think.”

“She’s bringing some things here.”

“She brings splendid things. Were you her dear boy?”

“One of them.”

“You are all her dear boys,” Catherine said. “She prefers the dear boys.
Listen to it rain.”

“It’s raining hard.”

“And you’ll always love me, won’t you?”

“Yes.”

“And the rain won’t make any difference?”

“No.”

“That’s good. Because I’m afraid of the rain.”

“Why?” I was sleepy. Outside the rain was falling steadily.

“I don’t know, darling. I’ve always been afraid of the rain.”

“I like it.”

“I like to walk in it. But it’s very hard on loving.”

“I’ll love you always.”

“I’ll love you in the rain and in the snow and in the hail and—what
else is there?”

“I don’t know. I guess I’m sleepy.”

“Go to sleep, darling, and I’ll love you no matter how it is.”

“You’re not really afraid of the rain are you?”

“Not when I’m with you.”

“Why are you afraid of it?”

“I don’t know.”

“Tell me.”

“Don’t make me.”

“Tell me.”

“No.”

“Tell me.”

“All right. I’m afraid of the rain because sometimes I see me dead in
it.”

“No.”

“And sometimes I see you dead in it.”

“That’s more likely.”

“No it’s not, darling. Because I can keep you safe. I know I can. But
nobody can help themselves.”

“Please stop it. I don’t want you to get Scotch and crazy to-night. We
won’t be together much longer.”

“No, but I am Scotch and crazy. But I’ll stop it. It’s all nonsense.”

“Yes it’s all nonsense.”

“It’s all nonsense. It’s only nonsense. I’m not afraid of the rain. I’m
not afraid of the rain. Oh, oh, God, I wish I wasn’t.” She was crying. I
comforted her and she stopped crying. But outside it kept on raining.




                               CHAPTER XX

One day in the afternoon we went to the races. Ferguson went too and
Crowell Rodgers, the boy who had been wounded in the eyes by the
explosion of the shell nose-cap. The girls dressed to go after lunch
while Crowell and I sat on the bed in his room and read the past
performances of the horses and the predictions in the racing paper.
Crowell’s head was bandaged and he did not care much about these races
but read the racing paper constantly and kept track of all the horses
for something to do. He said the horses were a terrible lot but they
were all the horses we had. Old Meyers liked him and gave him tips.
Meyers won on nearly every race but disliked to give tips because it
brought down the prices. The racing was very crooked. Men who had been
ruled off the turf everywhere else were racing in Italy. Meyers’
information was good but I hated to ask him because sometimes he did not
answer, and always you could see it hurt him to tell you, but he felt
obligated to tell us for some reason and he hated less to tell Crowell.
Crowell’s eyes had been hurt, one was hurt badly, and Meyers had trouble
with his eyes and so he liked Crowell. Meyers never told his wife what
horses he was playing and she won or lost, mostly lost, and talked all
the time.

We four drove out to San Siro in an open carriage. It was a lovely day
and we drove out through the park and out along the tramway and out of
town where the road was dusty. There were villas with iron fences and
big overgrown gardens and ditches with water flowing and green vegetable
gardens with dust on the leaves. We could look across the plain and see
farmhouses and the rich green farms with their irrigation ditches and
the mountains to the north. There were many carriages going into the
race track and the men at the gate let us in without cards because we
were in uniform. We left the carriage, bought programmes, and walked
across the infield and then across the smooth thick turf of the course
to the paddock. The grand stands were old and made of wood and the
betting booths were under the stands and in a row out near the stables.
There was a crowd of soldiers along the fence in the infield. The
paddock was fairly well filled with people and they were walking the
horses around in a ring under the trees behind the grand-stand. We saw
people we knew and got chairs for Ferguson and Catherine and watched the
horses.

They went around, one after the other, their heads down, the grooms
leading them. One horse, a purplish black, Crowell swore was dyed that
color. We watched him and it seemed possible. He had only come out just
before the bell rang to saddle. We looked him up in the programme from
the number on the groom’s arm and it was listed a black gelding named
Japalac. The race was for horses that had never won a race worth one
thousand lire or more. Catherine was sure his color had been changed.
Ferguson said she could not tell. I thought he looked suspicious. We all
agreed we ought to back him and pooled one hundred lire. The odds sheets
showed he would pay thirty-five to one. Crowell went over and bought the
tickets while we watched the jockeys ride around once more and then go
out under the trees to the track and gallop slowly up to the turn where
the start was to be.

We went up in the grand-stand to watch the race. They had no elastic
barrier at San Siro then and the starter lined up all the horses, they
looked very small way up the track, and then sent them off with a crack
of his long whip. They came past us with the black horse well in front
and on the turn he was running away from the others. I watched them on
the far side with the glasses and saw the jockey fighting to hold him in
but he could not hold him and when they came around the turn and into
the stretch the black horse was fifteen lengths ahead of the others. He
went way on up and around the turn after the finish.

“Isn’t it wonderful,” Catherine said. “We’ll have over three thousand
lire. He must be a splendid horse.”

“I hope his color doesn’t run,” Crowell said, “before they pay off.”

“He was really a lovely horse,” Catherine said. “I wonder if Mr. Meyers
backed him.”

“Did you have the winner?” I called to Meyers. He nodded.

“I didn’t,” Mrs. Meyers said. “Who did you children bet on?”

“Japalac.”

“Really? He’s thirty-five to one!”

“We liked his color.”

“I didn’t. I thought he looked seedy. They told me not to back him.”

“He won’t pay much,” Meyers said.

“He’s marked thirty-five to one in the quotes,” I said.

“He won’t pay much. At the last minute,” Meyers said, “they put a lot of
money on him.”

“Who?”

“Kempton and the boys. You’ll see. He won’t pay two to one.”

“Then we won’t get three thousand lire,” Catherine said. “I don’t like
this crooked racing!”

“We’ll get two hundred lire.”

“That’s nothing. That doesn’t do us any good. I thought we were going to
get three thousand.”

“It’s crooked and disgusting,” Ferguson said.

“Of course,” said Catherine, “if it hadn’t been crooked we’d never have
backed him at all. But I would have liked the three thousand lire.”

“Let’s go down and get a drink and see what they pay,” Crowell said. We
went out to where they posted the numbers and the bell rang to pay off
and they put up 18.50 after Japalac to win. That meant he paid less than
even money on a ten-lira bet.

We went to the bar under the grand stand and had a whiskey and soda
apiece. We ran into a couple of Italians we knew and McAdams, the
vice-consul, and they came up with us when we joined the girls. The
Italians were full of manners and McAdams talked to Catherine while we
went down to bet again. Mr. Meyers was standing near the pari-mutual.

“Ask him what he played,” I said to Crowell.

“What are you on, Mr. Meyers?” Crowell asked. Meyers took out his
programme and pointed to the number five with his pencil.

“Do you mind if we play him too?” Crowell asked.

“Go ahead. Go ahead. But don’t tell my wife I gave it to you.”

“Will you have a drink?” I asked.

“No thanks. I never drink.”

We put a hundred lire on number five to win and a hundred to place and
then had another whiskey and soda apiece. I was feeling very good and we
picked up a couple more Italians, who each had a drink with us, and went
back to the girls. These Italians were also very mannered and matched
manners with the two we had collected before. In a little while no one
could sit down. I gave the tickets to Catherine.

“What horse is it?”

“I don’t know. Mr. Meyers’ choice.”

“Don’t you even know the name?”

“No. You can find it on the programme. Number five I think.”

“You have touching faith,” she said. The number five won but did not pay
anything. Mr. Meyers was angry.

“You have to put up two hundred lire to make twenty,” he said. “Twelve
lire for ten. It’s not worth it. My wife lost twenty lire.”

“I’ll go down with you,” Catherine said to me. The Italians all stood
up. We went downstairs and out to the paddock.

“Do you like this?” Catherine asked.

“Yes. I guess I do.”

“It’s all right, I suppose,” she said. “But, darling, I can’t stand to
see so many people.”

“We don’t see many.”

“No. But those Meyers and the man from the bank with his wife and
daughters——”

“He cashes my sight drafts,” I said.

“Yes but some one else would if he didn’t. Those last four boys were
awful.”

“We can stay out here and watch the race from the fence.”

“That will be lovely. And, darling, let’s back a horse we’ve never heard
of and that Mr. Meyers won’t be backing.”

“All right.”

We backed a horse named Light For Me that finished fourth in a field of
five. We leaned on the fence and watched the horses go by, their hoofs
thudding as they went past, and saw the mountains off in the distance
and Milan beyond the trees and the fields.

“I feel so much cleaner,” Catherine said. The horses were coming back,
through the gate, wet and sweating, the jockeys quieting them and riding
up to dismount under the trees.

“Wouldn’t you like a drink? We could have one out here and see the
horses.”

“I’ll get them,” I said.

“The boy will bring them,” Catherine said. She put her hand up and the
boy came out from the Pagoda bar beside the stables. We sat down at a
round iron table.

“Don’t you like it better when we’re alone?”

“Yes,” I said.

“I felt very lonely when they were all there.”

“It’s grand here,” I said.

“Yes. It’s really a pretty course.”

“It’s nice.”

“Don’t let me spoil your fun, darling. I’ll go back whenever you want.”

“No,” I said. “We’ll stay here and have our drink. Then we’ll go down
and stand at the water jump for the steeplechase.”

“You’re awfully good to me,” she said.

After we had been alone awhile we were glad to see the others again. We
had a good time.




                              CHAPTER XXI

In September the first cool nights came, then the days were cool and the
leaves on the trees in the park began to turn color and we knew the
summer was gone. The fighting at the front went very badly and they
could not take San Gabriele. The fighting on the Bainsizza plateau was
over and by the middle of the month the fighting for San Gabriele was
about over too. They could not take it. Ettore was gone back to the
front. The horses were gone to Rome and there was no more racing.
Crowell had gone to Rome too, to be sent back to America. There were
riots twice in the town against the war and bad rioting in Turin. A
British major at the club told me the Italians had lost one hundred and
fifty thousand men on the Bainsizza plateau and on San Gabriele. He said
they had lost forty thousand on the Carso besides. We had a drink and he
talked. He said the fighting was over for the year down here and that
the Italians had bitten off more than they could chew. He said the
offensive in Flanders was going to the bad. If they killed men as they
did this fall the Allies would be cooked in another year. He said we
were all cooked but we were all right as long as we did not know it. We
were all cooked. The thing was not to recognize it. The last country to
realize they were cooked would win the war. We had another drink. Was I
on somebody’s staff? No. He was. It was all balls. We were alone in the
club sitting back in one of the big leather sofas. His boots were
smoothly polished dull leather. They were beautiful boots. He said it
was all balls. They thought only in divisions and man-power. They all
squabbled about divisions and only killed them when they got them. They
were all cooked. The Germans won the victories. By God they were
soldiers. The old Hun was a soldier. But they were cooked too. We were
all cooked. I asked about Russia. He said they were cooked already. I’d
soon see they were cooked. Then the Austrians were cooked too. If they
got some Hun divisions they could do it. Did he think they would attack
this fall? Of course they would. The Italians were cooked. Everybody
knew they were cooked. The old Hun would come down through the Trentino
and cut the railway at Vicenza and then where would the Italians be?
They tried that in ’sixteen, I said. Not with Germans. Yes, I said. But
they probably wouldn’t do that, he said. It was too simple. They’d try
something complicated and get royally cooked. I had to go, I said. I had
to get back to the hospital. “Good-by,” he said. Then cheerily, “Every
sort of luck!” There was a great contrast between his world pessimism
and personal cheeriness.

I stopped at a barber shop and was shaved and went home to the hospital.
My leg was as well as it would get for a long time. I had been up for
examination three days before. There were still some treatments to take
before my course at the Ospedale Maggiore was finished and I walked
along the side street practising not limping. An old man was cutting
silhouettes under an arcade. I stopped to watch him. Two girls were
posing and he cut their silhouettes together, snipping very fast and
looking at them, his head on one side. The girls were giggling. He
showed me the silhouettes before he pasted them on white paper and
handed them to the girls.

“They’re beautiful,” he said. “How about you, Tenente?”

The girls went away looking at their silhouettes and laughing. They were
nice-looking girls. One of them worked in the wine shop across from the
hospital.

“All right,” I said.

“Take your cap off.”

“No. With it on.”

“It will not be so beautiful,” the old man said. “But,” he brightened,
“it will be more military.”

He snipped away at the black paper, then separated the two thicknesses
and pasted the profiles on a card and handed them to me.

“How much?”

“That’s all right.” He waved his hand. “I just made them for you.”

“Please.” I brought out some coppers. “For pleasure.”

“No. I did them for a pleasure. Give them to your girl.”

“Many thanks until we meet.”

“Until I see thee.”

I went on to the hospital. There were some letters, an official one, and
some others. I was to have three weeks’ convalescent leave and then
return to the front. I read it over carefully. Well, that was that. The
convalescent leave started October fourth when my course was finished.
Three weeks was twenty-one days. That made October twenty-fifth. I told
them I would not be in and went to the restaurant a little way up the
street from the hospital for supper and read my letters and the
_Corriere Della Sera_ at the table. There was a letter from my
grandfather, containing family news, patriotic encouragement, a draft
for two hundred dollars, and a few clippings; a dull letter from the
priest at our mess, a letter from a man I knew who was flying with the
French and had gotten in with a wild gang and was telling about it, and
a note from Rinaldi asking me how long I was going to skulk in Milano
and what was all the news? He wanted me to bring him phonograph records
and enclosed a list. I drank a small bottle of chianti with the meal,
had a coffee afterward with a glass of cognac, finished the paper, put
my letters in my pocket, left the paper on the table with the tip and
went out. In my room at the hospital I undressed, put on pajamas and a
dressing-gown, pulled down the curtains on the door that opened onto the
balcony and sitting up in bed read Boston papers from a pile Mrs. Meyers
had left for her boys at the hospital. The Chicago White Sox were
winning the American League pennant and the New York Giants were leading
the National League. Babe Ruth was a pitcher then playing for Boston.
The papers were dull, the news was local and stale, and the war news was
all old. The American news was all training camps. I was glad I wasn’t
in a training camp. The baseball news was all I could read and I did not
have the slightest interest in it. A number of papers together made it
impossible to read with interest. It was not very timely but I read at
it for a while. I wondered if America really got into the war, if they
would close down the major leagues. They probably wouldn’t. There was
still racing in Milan and the war could not be much worse. They had
stopped racing in France. That was where our horse Japalac came from.
Catherine was not due on duty until nine o’clock. I heard her passing
along the floor when she first came on duty and once saw her pass in the
hall. She went to several other rooms and finally came into mine.

“I’m late, darling,” she said. “There was a lot to do. How are you?”

I told her about my papers and the leave.

“That’s lovely,” she said. “Where do you want to go?”

“Nowhere. I want to stay here.”

“That’s silly. You pick a place to go and I’ll come too.”

“How will you work it?”

“I don’t know. But I will.”

“You’re pretty wonderful.”

“No I’m not. But life isn’t hard to manage when you’ve nothing to lose.”

“How do you mean?”

“Nothing. I was only thinking how small obstacles seemed that once were
so big.”

“I should think it might be hard to manage.”

“No it won’t, darling. If necessary I’ll simply leave. But it won’t come
to that.”

“Where should we go?”

“I don’t care. Anywhere you want. Anywhere we don’t know people.”

“Don’t you care where we go?”

“No. I’ll like any place.”

She seemed upset and taut.

“What’s the matter, Catherine?”

“Nothing. Nothing’s the matter.”

“Yes there is.”

“No nothing. Really nothing.”

“I know there is. Tell me, darling. You can tell me.”

“It’s nothing.”

“Tell me.”

“I don’t want to. I’m afraid I’ll make you unhappy or worry you.”

“No it won’t.”

“You’re sure? It doesn’t worry me but I’m afraid to worry you.”

“It won’t if it doesn’t worry you.”

“I don’t want to tell.”

“Tell it.”

“Do I have to?”

“Yes.”

“I’m going to have a baby, darling. It’s almost three months along.
You’re not worried, are you? Please please don’t. You mustn’t worry.”

“All right.”

“Is it all right?”

“Of course.”

“I did everything. I took everything but it didn’t make any difference.”

“I’m not worried.”

“I couldn’t help it, darling, and I haven’t worried about it. You
mustn’t worry or feel badly.”

“I only worry about you.”

“That’s it. That’s what you mustn’t do. People have babies all the time.
Everybody has babies. It’s a natural thing.”

“You’re pretty wonderful.”

“No I’m not. But you mustn’t mind, darling. I’ll try and not make
trouble for you. I know I’ve made trouble now. But haven’t I been a good
girl until now? You never knew it, did you?”

“No.”

“It will all be like that. You simply mustn’t worry. I can see you’re
worrying. Stop it. Stop it right away. Wouldn’t you like a drink,
darling? I know a drink always makes you feel cheerful.”

“No. I feel cheerful. And you’re pretty wonderful.”

“No I’m not. But I’ll fix everything to be together if you pick out a
place for us to go. It ought to be lovely in October. We’ll have a
lovely time, darling, and I’ll write you every day while you’re at the
front.”

“Where will you be?”

“I don’t know yet. But somewhere splendid. I’ll look after all that.”

We were quiet awhile and did not talk. Catherine was sitting on the bed
and I was looking at her but we did not touch each other. We were apart
as when some one comes into a room and people are self-conscious. She
put out her hand and took mine.

“You aren’t angry are you, darling?”

“No.”

“And you don’t feel trapped?”

“Maybe a little. But not by you.”

“I didn’t mean by me. You mustn’t be stupid. I meant trapped at all.”

“You always feel trapped biologically.”

She went away a long way without stirring or removing her hand.

“‘Always’ isn’t a pretty word.”

“I’m sorry.”

“It’s all right. But you see I’ve never had a baby and I’ve never even
loved any one. And I’ve tried to be the way you wanted and then you talk
about ‘always.’”

“I could cut off my tongue,” I offered.

“Oh, darling!” she came back from wherever she had been. “You mustn’t
mind me.” We were both together again and the self-consciousness was
gone. “We really are the same one and we mustn’t misunderstand on
purpose.”

“We won’t.”

“But people do. They love each other and they misunderstand on purpose
and they fight and then suddenly they aren’t the same one.”

“We won’t fight.”

“We mustn’t. Because there’s only us two and in the world there’s all
the rest of them. If anything comes between us we’re gone and then they
have us.”

“They won’t get us,” I said. “Because you’re too brave. Nothing ever
happens to the brave.”

“They die of course.”

“But only once.”

“I don’t know. Who said that?”

“The coward dies a thousand deaths, the brave but one?”

“Of course. Who said it?”

“I don’t know.”

“He was probably a coward,” she said. “He knew a great deal about
cowards but nothing about the brave. The brave dies perhaps two thousand
deaths if he’s intelligent. He simply doesn’t mention them.”

“I don’t know. It’s hard to see inside the head of the brave.”

“Yes. That’s how they keep that way.”

“You’re an authority.”

“You’re right, darling. That was deserved.”

“You’re brave.”

“No,” she said. “But I would like to be.”

“I’m not,” I said, “I know where I stand. I’ve been out long enough to
know. I’m like a ball-player that bats two hundred and thirty and knows
he’s no better.”

“What is a ball-player that bats two hundred and thirty? It’s awfully
impressive.”

“It’s not. It means a mediocre hitter in baseball.”

“But still a hitter,” she prodded me.

“I guess we’re both conceited,” I said. “But you are brave.”

“No. But I hope to be.”

“We’re both brave,” I said. “And I’m very brave when I’ve had a drink.”

“We’re splendid people,” Catherine said. She went over to the armoire
and brought me the cognac and a glass. “Have a drink, darling,” she
said. “You’ve been awfully good.”

“I don’t really want one.”

“Take one.”

“All right.” I poured the water glass a third full of cognac and drank
it off.

“That was very big,” she said. “I know brandy is for heroes. But you
shouldn’t exaggerate.”

“Where will we live after the war?”

“In an old people’s home probably,” she said. “For three years I looked
forward very childishly to the war ending at Christmas. But now I look
forward till when our son will be a lieutenant commander.”

“Maybe he’ll be a general.”

“If it’s an hundred years’ war he’ll have time to try both of the
services.”

“Don’t you want a drink?”

“No. It always makes you happy, darling, and it only makes me dizzy.”

“Didn’t you ever drink brandy?”

“No, darling. I’m a very old-fashioned wife.”

I reached down to the floor for the bottle and poured another drink.

“I’d better go to have a look at your compatriots,” Catherine said.
“Perhaps you’ll read the papers until I come back.”

“Do you have to go?”

“Now or later.”

“All right. Now.”

“I’ll come back later.”

“I’ll have finished the papers,” I said.




                              CHAPTER XXII

It turned cold that night and the next day it was raining. Coming home
from the Ospedale Maggiore it rained very hard and I was wet when I came
in. Up in my room the rain was coming down heavily outside on the
balcony, and the wind blew it against the glass doors. I changed my
clothing and drank some brandy but the brandy did not taste good. I felt
sick in the night and in the morning after breakfast I was nauseated.

“There is no doubt about it,” the house surgeon said. “Look at the
whites of his eyes, Miss.”

Miss Gage looked. They had me look in a glass. The whites of the eyes
were yellow and it was the jaundice. I was sick for two weeks with it.
For that reason we did not spend a convalescent leave together. We had
planned to go to Pallanza on Lago Maggiore. It is nice there in the fall
when the leaves turn. There are walks you can take and you can troll for
trout in the lake. It would have been better than Stresa because there
are fewer people at Pallanza. Stresa is so easy to get to from Milan
that there are always people you know. There is a nice village at
Pallanza and you can row out to the islands where the fishermen live and
there is a restaurant on the biggest island. But we did not go.

One day while I was in bed with jaundice Miss Van Campen came in the
room, opened the door into the armoire and saw the empty bottles there.
I had sent a load of them down by the porter and I believe she must have
seen them going out and come up to find some more. They were mostly
vermouth bottles, marsala bottles, capri bottles, empty chianti flasks
and a few cognac bottles. The porter had carried out the large bottles,
those that had held vermouth, and the straw-covered chianti flasks, and
left the brandy bottles for the last. It was the brandy bottles and a
bottle shaped like a bear, which had held kümmel, that Miss Van Campen
found. The bear-shaped bottle enraged her particularly. She held it up;
the bear was sitting up on his haunches with his paws up; there was a
cork in his glass head and a few sticky crystals at the bottom. I
laughed.

“It was kümmel,” I said. “The best kümmel comes in those bear-shaped
bottles. It comes from Russia.”

“Those are all brandy bottles, aren’t they?” Miss Van Campen asked.

“I can’t see them all,” I said. “But they probably are.”

“How long has this been going on?”

“I bought them and brought them in myself,” I said. “I have had Italian
officers visit me frequently and I have kept brandy to offer them.”

“You haven’t been drinking it yourself?” she said.

“I have also drunk it myself.”

“Brandy,” she said. “Eleven empty bottles of brandy and that bear
liquid.”

“Kümmel.”

“I will send for some one to take them away. Those are all the empty
bottles you have?”

“For the moment.”

“And I was pitying you having jaundice. Pity is something that is wasted
on you.”

“Thank you.”

“I suppose you can’t be blamed for not wanting to go back to the front.
But I should think you would try something more intelligent than
producing jaundice with alcoholism.”

“With what?”

“With alcoholism. You heard me say it.” I did not say anything. “Unless
you find something else I’m afraid you will have to go back to the front
when you are through with your jaundice. I don’t believe self-inflicted
jaundice entitles you to a convalescent leave.”

“You don’t?”

“I do not.”

“Have you ever had jaundice, Miss Van Campen?”

“No, but I have seen a great deal of it.”

“You noticed how the patients enjoyed it?”

“I suppose it is better than the front.”

“Miss Van Campen,” I said, “did you ever know a man who tried to disable
himself by kicking himself in the scrotum?”

Miss Van Campen ignored the actual question. She had to ignore it or
leave the room. She was not ready to leave because she had disliked me
for a long time and she was now cashing in.

“I have known many men to escape the front through self-inflicted
wounds.”

“That wasn’t the question. I have seen self-inflicted wounds also. I
asked you if you had ever known a man who had tried to disable himself
by kicking himself in the scrotum. Because that is the nearest sensation
to jaundice and it is a sensation that I believe few women have ever
experienced. That was why I asked you if you had ever had the jaundice,
Miss Van Campen, because—” Miss Van Campen left the room. Later Miss
Gage came in.

“What did you say to Van Campen? She was furious.”

“We were comparing sensations. I was going to suggest that she had never
experienced childbirth——”

“You’re a fool,” Gage said. “She’s after your scalp.”

“She has my scalp,” I said. “She’s lost me my leave and she might try
and get me court-martialled. She’s mean enough.”

“She never liked you,” Gage said. “What’s it about?”

“She says I’ve drunk myself into jaundice so as not to go back to the
front.”

“Pooh,” said Gage. “I’ll swear you’ve never taken a drink. Everybody
will swear you’ve never taken a drink.”

“She found the bottles.”

“I’ve told you a hundred times to clear out those bottles. Where are
they now?”

“In the armoire.”

“Have you a suitcase?”

“No. Put them in that rucksack.”

Miss Gage packed the bottles in the rucksack. “I’ll give them to the
porter,” she said. She started for the door.

“Just a minute,” Miss Van Campen said. “I’ll take those bottles.” She
had the porter with her. “Carry them, please,” she said. “I want to show
them to the doctor when I make my report.”

She went down the hall. The porter carried the sack. He knew what was in
it.

Nothing happened except that I lost my leave.




                             CHAPTER XXIII

The night I was to return to the front I sent the porter down to hold a
seat for me on the train when it came from Turin. The train was to leave
at midnight. It was made up at Turin and reached Milan about half-past
ten at night and lay in the station until time to leave. You had to be
there when it came in, to get a seat. The porter took a friend with him,
a machine-gunner on leave who worked in a tailor shop, and was sure that
between them they could hold a place. I gave them money for platform
tickets and had them take my baggage. There was a big rucksack and two
musettes.

I said good-by at the hospital at about five o’clock and went out. The
porter had my baggage in his lodge and I told him I would be at the
station a little before midnight. His wife called me “Signorino” and
cried. She wiped her eyes and shook hands and then cried again. I patted
her on the back and she cried once more. She had done my mending and was
a very short dumpy, happy-faced woman with white hair. When she cried
her whole face went to pieces. I went down to the corner where there was
a wine shop and waited inside looking out the window. It was dark
outside and cold and misty. I paid for my coffee and grappa and I
watched the people going by in the light from the window. I saw
Catherine and knocked on the window. She looked, saw me and smiled, and
I went out to meet her. She was wearing a dark blue cape and a soft felt
hat. We walked along together, along the sidewalk past the wine shops,
then across the market square and up the street and through the archway
to the cathedral square. There were street-car tracks and beyond them
was the cathedral. It was white and wet in the mist. We crossed the tram
tracks. On our left were the shops, their windows lighted, and the
entrance to the galleria. There was a fog in the square and when we came
close to the front of the cathedral it was very big and the stone was
wet.

“Would you like to go in?”

“No,” Catherine said. We walked along. There was a soldier standing with
his girl in the shadow of one of the stone buttresses ahead of us and we
passed them. They were standing tight up against the stone and he had
put his cape around her.

“They’re like us,” I said.

“Nobody is like us,” Catherine said. She did not mean it happily.

“I wish they had some place to go.”

“It mightn’t do them any good.”

“I don’t know. Everybody ought to have some place to go.”

“They have the cathedral,” Catherine said. We were past it now. We
crossed the far end of the square and looked back at the cathedral. It
was fine in the mist. We were standing in front of the leather goods
shop. There were riding boots, a rucksack and ski boots in the window.
Each article was set apart as an exhibit; the rucksack in the centre,
the riding boots on one side and the ski boots on the other. The leather
was dark and oiled smooth as a used saddle. The electric light made high
lights on the dull oiled leather.

“We’ll ski some time.”

“In two months there will be skiing at Mürren,” Catherine said.

“Let’s go there.”

“All right,” she said. We went on past other windows and turned down a
side street.

“I’ve never been this way.”

“This is the way I go to the hospital,” I said. It was a narrow street
and we kept on the right-hand side. There were many people passing in
the fog. There were shops and all the windows were lighted. We looked in
a window at a pile of cheeses. I stopped in front of an armorer’s shop.

“Come in a minute. I have to buy a gun.”

“What sort of gun?”

“A pistol.” We went in and I unbuttoned my belt and laid it with the
empty holster on the counter. Two women were behind the counter. The
women brought out several pistols.

“It must fit this,” I said, opening the holster. It was a gray leather
holster and I had bought it secondhand to wear in the town.

“Have they good pistols?” Catherine asked.

“They’re all about the same. Can I try this one?” I asked the woman.

“I have no place now to shoot,” she said. “But it is very good. You will
not make a mistake with it.”

I snapped it and pulled back the action. The spring was rather strong
but it worked smoothly. I sighted it and snapped it again.

“It is used,” the woman said. “It belonged to an officer who was an
excellent shot.”

“Did you sell it to him?”

“Yes.”

“How did you get it back?”

“From his orderly.”

“Maybe you have mine,” I said. “How much is this?”

“Fifty lire. It is very cheap.”

“All right. I want two extra clips and a box of cartridges.”

She brought them from under the counter.

“Have you any need for a sword?” she asked. “I have some used swords
very cheap.”

“I’m going to the front,” I said.

“Oh yes, then you won’t need a sword,” she said.

I paid for the cartridges and the pistol, filled the magazine and put it
in place, put the pistol in my empty holster, filled the extra clips
with cartridges and put them in the leather slots on the holster and
then buckled on my belt. The pistol felt heavy on the belt. Still, I
thought, it was better to have a regulation pistol. You could always get
shells.

“Now we’re fully armed,” I said. “That was the one thing I had to
remember to do. Some one got my other one going to the hospital.”

“I hope it’s a good pistol,” Catherine said.

“Was there anything else?” the woman asked.

“I don’t believe so.”

“The pistol has a lanyard,” she said.

“So I noticed.” The woman wanted to sell something else.

“You don’t need a whistle?”

“I don’t believe so.”

The woman said good-by and we went out onto the sidewalk. Catherine
looked in the window. The woman looked out and bowed to us.

“What are those little mirrors set in wood for?”

“They’re for attracting birds. They twirl them out in the field and
larks see them and come out and the Italians shoot them.”

“They are an ingenious people,” Catherine said. “You don’t shoot larks
do you, darling, in America?”

“Not especially.”

We crossed the street and started to walk up the other side.

“I feel better now,” Catherine said. “I felt terrible when we started.”

“We always feel good when we’re together.”

“We always will be together.”

“Yes, except that I’m going away at midnight.”

“Don’t think about it, darling.”

We walked on up the street. The fog made the lights yellow.

“Aren’t you tired?” Catherine asked.

“How about you?”

“I’m all right. It’s fun to walk.”

“But let’s not do it too long.”

“No.”

We turned down a side street where there were no lights and walked in
the street. I stopped and kissed Catherine. While I kissed her I felt
her hand on my shoulder. She had pulled my cape around her so it covered
both of us. We were standing in the street against a high wall.

“Let’s go some place,” I said.

“Good,” said Catherine. We walked on along the street until it came out
onto a wider street that was beside a canal. On the other side was a
brick wall and buildings. Ahead, down the street, I saw a street-car
cross a bridge.

“We can get a cab up at the bridge,” I said. We stood on the bridge in
the fog waiting for a carriage. Several street-cars passed, full of
people going home. Then a carriage came along but there was some one in
it. The fog was turning to rain.

“We could walk or take a tram,” Catherine said.

“One will be along,” I said. “They go by here.”

“Here one comes,” she said.

The driver stopped his horse and lowered the metal sign on his meter.
The top of the carriage was up and there were drops of water on the
driver’s coat. His varnished hat was shining in the wet. We sat back in
the seat together and the top of the carriage made it dark.

“Where did you tell him to go?”

“To the station. There’s a hotel across from the station where we can
go.”

“We can go the way we are? Without luggage?”

“Yes,” I said.

It was a long ride to the station up side streets in the rain.

“Won’t we have dinner?” Catherine asked. “I’m afraid I’ll be hungry.”

“We’ll have it in our room.”

“I haven’t anything to wear. I haven’t even a nightgown.”

“We’ll get one,” I said and called to the driver.

“Go to the Via Manzoni and up that.” He nodded and turned off to the
left at the next corner. On the big street Catherine watched for a shop.

“Here’s a place,” she said. I stopped the driver and Catherine got out,
walked across the sidewalk and went inside. I sat back in the carriage
and waited for her. It was raining and I could smell the wet street and
the horse steaming in the rain. She came back with a package and got in
and we drove on.

“I was very extravagant, darling,” she said, “but it’s a fine
nightgown.”

At the hotel I asked Catherine to wait in the carriage while I went in
and spoke to the manager. There were plenty of rooms. Then I went out to
the carriage, paid the driver, and Catherine and I walked in together.
The small boy in buttons carried the package. The manager bowed us
toward the elevator. There was much red plush and brass. The manager
went up in the elevator with us.

“Monsieur and Madame wish dinner in their room?”

“Yes. Will you have the menu brought up?” I said.

“You wish something special for dinner. Some game or a soufflet?”

The elevator passed three floors with a click each time, then clicked
and stopped.

“What have you as game?”

“I could get a pheasant, or a woodcock.”

“A woodcock,” I said. We walked down the corridor. The carpet was worn.
There were many doors. The manager stopped and unlocked a door and
opened it.

“Here you are. A lovely room.”

The small boy in buttons put the package on the table in the centre of
the room. The manager opened the curtains.

“It is foggy outside,” he said. The room was furnished in red plush.
There were many mirrors, two chairs and a large bed with a satin
coverlet. A door led to the bathroom.

“I will send up the menu,” the manager said. He bowed and went out.

I went to the window and looked out, then pulled a cord that shut the
thick plush curtains. Catherine was sitting on the bed, looking at the
cut glass chandelier. She had taken her hat off and her hair shone under
the light. She saw herself in one of the mirrors and put her hands to
her hair. I saw her in three other mirrors. She did not look happy. She
let her cape fall on the bed.

“What’s the matter, darling?”

“I never felt like a whore before,” she said. I went over to the window
and pulled the curtain aside and looked out. I had not thought it would
be like this.

“You’re not a whore.”

“I know it, darling. But it isn’t nice to feel like one.” Her voice was
dry and flat.

“This was the best hotel we could get in,” I said. I looked out the
window. Across the square were the lights of the station. There were
carriages going by on the street and I saw the trees in the park. The
lights from the hotel shone on the wet pavement. Oh, hell, I thought, do
we have to argue now?

“Come over here please,” Catherine said. The flatness was all gone out
of her voice. “Come over, please. I’m a good girl again.” I looked over
at the bed. She was smiling.

I went over and sat on the bed beside her and kissed her.

“You’re my good girl.”

“I’m certainly yours,” she said.

After we had eaten we felt fine, and then after, we felt very happy and
in a little time the room felt like our own home. My room at the
hospital had been our own home and this room was our home too in the
same way.

Catherine wore my tunic over her shoulders while we ate. We were very
hungry and the meal was good and we drank a bottle of Capri and a bottle
of St. Estephe. I drank most of it but Catherine drank some and it made
her feel splendid. For dinner we had a woodcock with soufflé potatoes
and purée de marron, a salad, and zabaione for dessert.

“It’s a fine room,” Catherine said. “It’s a lovely room. We should have
stayed here all the time we’ve been in Milan.”

“It’s a funny room. But it’s nice.”

“Vice is a wonderful thing,” Catherine said. “The people who go in for
it seem to have good taste about it. The red plush is really fine. It’s
just the thing. And the mirrors are very attractive.”

“You’re a lovely girl.”

“I don’t know how a room like this would be for waking up in the
morning. But it’s really a splendid room.” I poured another glass of St.
Estephe.

“I wish we could do something really sinful,” Catherine said.
“Everything we do seems so innocent and simple. I can’t believe we do
anything wrong.”

“You’re a grand girl.”

“I only feel hungry. I get terribly hungry.”

“You’re a fine simple girl,” I said.

“I am a simple girl. No one ever understood it except you.”

“Once when I first met you I spent an afternoon thinking how we would go
to the Hotel Cavour together and how it would be.”

“That was awfully cheeky of you. This isn’t the Cavour is it?”

“No. They wouldn’t have taken us in there.”

“They’ll take us in some time. But that’s how we differ, darling. I
never thought about anything.”

“Didn’t you ever at all?”

“A little,” she said.

“Oh you’re a lovely girl.”

I poured another glass of wine.

“I’m a very simple girl,” Catherine said.

“I didn’t think so at first. I thought you were a crazy girl.”

“I was a little crazy. But I wasn’t crazy in any complicated manner. I
didn’t confuse you did I, darling?”

“Wine is a grand thing,” I said. “It makes you forget all the bad.”

“It’s lovely,” said Catherine. “But it’s given my father gout very
badly.”

“Have you a father?”

“Yes,” said Catherine. “He has gout. You won’t ever have to meet him.
Haven’t you a father?”

“No,” I said. “A step-father.”

“Will I like him?”

“You won’t have to meet him.”

“We have such a fine time,” Catherine said. “I don’t take any interest
in anything else any more. I’m so very happy married to you.”

The waiter came and took away the things. After a while we were very
still and we could hear the rain. Down below on the street a motor car
honked.

               “‘But at my back I always hear
               Time’s wingèd chariot hurrying near,’”

I said.

“I know that poem,” Catherine said. “It’s by Marvell. But it’s about a
girl who wouldn’t live with a man.”

My head felt very clear and cold and I wanted to talk facts.

“Where will you have the baby?”

“I don’t know. The best place I can find.”

“How will you arrange it?”

“The best way I can. Don’t worry, darling. We may have several babies
before the war is over.”

“It’s nearly time to go.”

“I know. You can make it time if you want.”

“No.”

“Then don’t worry, darling. You were fine until now and now you’re
worrying.”

“I won’t. How often will you write?”

“Every day. Do they read your letters?”

“They can’t read English enough to hurt any.”

“I’ll make them very confusing,” Catherine said.

“But not too confusing.”

“I’ll just make them a little confusing.”

“I’m afraid we have to start to go.”

“All right, darling.”

“I hate to leave our fine house.”

“So do I.”

“But we have to go.”

“All right. But we’re never settled in our home very long.”

“We will be.”

“I’ll have a fine home for you when you come back.”

“Maybe I’ll be back right away.”

“Perhaps you’ll be hurt just a little in the foot.”

“Or the lobe of the ear.”

“No I want your ears the way they are.”

“And not my feet?”

“Your feet have been hit already.”

“We have to go, darling. Really.”

“All right. You go first.”




                              CHAPTER XXIV

We walked down the stairs instead of taking the elevator. The carpet on
the stairs was worn. I had paid for the dinner when it came up and the
waiter, who had brought it, was sitting on a chair near the door. He
jumped up and bowed and I went with him into the side room and paid the
bill for the room. The manager had remembered me as a friend and refused
payment in advance but when he retired he had remembered to have the
waiter stationed at the door so that I should not get out without
paying. I suppose that had happened; even with his friends. One had so
many friends in a war.

I asked the waiter to get us a carriage and he took Catherine’s package
that I was carrying and went out with an umbrella. Outside through the
window we saw him crossing the street in the rain. We stood in the side
room and looked out the window.

“How do you feel, Cat?”

“Sleepy.”

“I feel hollow and hungry.”

“Have you anything to eat?”

“Yes, in my musette.”

I saw the carriage coming. It stopped, the horse’s head hanging in the
rain, and the waiter stepped out, opened his umbrella, and came toward
the hotel. We met him at the door and walked out under the umbrella down
the wet walk to the carriage at the curb. Water was running in the
gutter.

“There is your package on the seat,” the waiter said. He stood with the
umbrella until we were in and I had tipped him.

“Many thanks. Pleasant journey,” he said. The coachman lifted the reins
and the horse started. The waiter turned away under the umbrella and
went toward the hotel. We drove down the street and turned to the left,
then came around to the right in front of the station. There were two
carabinieri standing under the light just out of the rain. The light
shone on their hats. The rain was clear and transparent against the
light from the station. A porter came out from under the shelter of the
station, his shoulders up against the rain.

“No,” I said. “Thanks. I don’t need thee.”

He went back under the shelter of the archway. I turned to Catherine.
Her face was in the shadow from the hood of the carriage.

“We might as well say good-by.”

“I can’t go in?”

“No.”

“Good-by, Cat.”

“Will you tell him the hospital?”

“Yes.”

I told the driver the address to drive to. He nodded.

“Good-by,” I said. “Take good care of yourself and young Catherine.”

“Good-by, darling.”

“Good-by,” I said. I stepped out into the rain and the carriage started.
Catherine leaned out and I saw her face in the light. She smiled and
waved. The carriage went up the street, Catherine pointed in toward the
archway. I looked, there were only the two carabinieri and the archway.
I realized she meant for me to get in out of the rain. I went in and
stood and watched the carriage turn the corner. Then I started through
the station and down the runway to the train.

The porter was on the platform looking for me. I followed him into the
train, crowding past people and along the aisle and in through a door to
where the machine-gunner sat in the corner of a full compartment. My
rucksack and musettes were above his head on the luggage rack. There
were many men standing in the corridor and the men in the compartment
all looked at us when we came in. There were not enough places in the
train and every one was hostile. The machine-gunner stood up for me to
sit down. Some one tapped me on the shoulder. I looked around. It was a
very tall gaunt captain of artillery with a red scar along his jaw. He
had looked through the glass on the corridor and then come in.

“What do you say?” I asked. I had turned and faced him. He was taller
than I and his face was very thin under the shadow of his cap-visor and
the scar was new and shiny. Every one in the compartment was looking at
me.

“You can’t do that,” he said. “You can’t have a soldier save you a
place.”

“I have done it.”

He swallowed and I saw his Adam’s apple go up and then down. The
machine-gunner stood in front of the place. Other men looked in through
the glass. No one in the compartment said anything.

“You have no right to do that. I was here two hours before you came.”

“What do you want?”

“The seat.”

“So do I.”

I watched his face and could feel the whole compartment against me. I
did not blame them. He was in the right. But I wanted the seat. Still no
one said anything.

Oh, hell, I thought.

“Sit down, Signor Capitano,” I said. The machine-gunner moved out of the
way and the tall captain sat down. He looked at me. His face seemed
hurt. But he had the seat. “Get my things,” I said to the
machine-gunner. We went out in the corridor. The train was full and I
knew there was no chance of a place. I gave the porter and the
machine-gunner ten lire apiece. They went down the corridor and outside
on the platform looking in the windows but there were no places.

“Maybe some will get off at Brescia,” the porter said.

“More will get on at Brescia,” said the machine-gunner. I said good-by
to them and we shook hands and they left. They both felt badly. Inside
the train we were all standing in the corridor when the train started. I
watched the lights of the station and the yards as we went out. It was
still raining and soon the windows were wet and you could not see out.
Later I slept on the floor of the corridor; first putting my pocket-book
with my money and papers in it inside my shirt and trousers so that it
was inside the leg of my breeches. I slept all night, waking at Brescia
and Verona when more men got on the train, but going back to sleep at
once. I had my head on one of the musettes and my arms around the other
and I could feel the pack and they could all walk over me if they
wouldn’t step on me. Men were sleeping on the floor all down the
corridor. Others stood holding on to the window rods or leaning against
the doors. That train was always crowded.




                                BOOK III




                              CHAPTER XXV

Now in the fall the trees were all bare and the roads were muddy. I rode
to Gorizia from Udine on a camion. We passed other camions on the road
and I looked at the country. The mulberry trees were bare and the fields
were brown. There were wet dead leaves on the road from the rows of bare
trees and men were working on the road, tamping stone in the ruts from
piles of crushed stone along the side of the road between the trees. We
saw the town with a mist over it that cut off the mountains. We crossed
the river and I saw that it was running high. It had been raining in the
mountains. We came into the town past the factories and then the houses
and villas and I saw that many more houses had been hit. On a narrow
street we passed a British Red Cross ambulance. The driver wore a cap
and his face was thin and very tanned. I did not know him. I got down
from the camion in the big square in front of the Town Major’s house,
the driver handed down my rucksack and I put it on and swung on the two
musettes and walked to our villa. It did not feel like a homecoming.

I walked down the damp gravel driveway looking at the villa through the
trees. The windows were all shut but the door was open. I went in and
found the major sitting at a table in the bare room with maps and typed
sheets of paper on the wall.

“Hello,” he said. “How are you?” He looked older and drier.

“I’m good,” I said. “How is everything?”

“It’s all over,” he said. “Take off your kit and sit down.” I put my
pack and the two musettes on the floor and my cap on the pack. I brought
the other chair over from the wall and sat down by the desk.

“It’s been a bad summer,” the major said. “Are you strong now?”

“Yes.”

“Did you ever get the decorations?”

“Yes. I got them fine. Thank you very much.”

“Let’s see them.”

I opened my cape so he could see the two ribbons.

“Did you get the boxes with the medals?”

“No. Just the papers.”

“The boxes will come later. That takes more time.”

“What do you want me to do?”

“The cars are all away. There are six up north at Caporetto. You know
Caporetto?”

“Yes,” I said. I remembered it as a little white town with a campanile
in a valley. It was a clean little town and there was a fine fountain in
the square.

“They are working from there. There are many sick now. The fighting is
over.”

“Where are the others?”

“There are two up in the mountains and four still on the Bainsizza. The
other two ambulance sections are in the Carso with the third army.”

“What do you wish me to do?”

“You can go and take over the four cars on the Bainsizza if you like.
Gino has been up there a long time. You haven’t seen it up there, have
you?”

“No.”

“It was very bad. We lost three cars.”

“I heard about it.”

“Yes, Rinaldi wrote you.”

“Where is Rinaldi?”

“He is here at the hospital. He has had a summer and fall of it.”

“I believe it.”

“It has been bad,” the major said. “You couldn’t believe how bad it’s
been. I’ve often thought you were lucky to be hit when you were.”

“I know I was.”

“Next year will be worse,” the major said. “Perhaps they will attack
now. They say they are to attack but I can’t believe it. It is too late.
You saw the river?”

“Yes. It’s high already.”

“I don’t believe they will attack now that the rains have started. We
will have the snow soon. What about your countrymen? Will there be other
Americans besides yourself?”

“They are training an army of ten million.”

“I hope we get some of them. But the French will hog them all. We’ll
never get any down here. All right. You stay here to-night and go out
to-morrow with the little car and send Gino back. I’ll send somebody
with you that knows the road. Gino will tell you everything. They are
shelling quite a little still but it is all over. You will want to see
the Bainsizza.”

“I’m glad to see it. I am glad to be back with you again, Signor
Maggiore.”

He smiled. “You are very good to say so. I am very tired of this war. If
I was away I do not believe I would come back.”

“Is it so bad?”

“Yes. It is so bad and worse. Go get cleaned up and find your friend
Rinaldi.”

I went out and carried my bags up the stairs. Rinaldi was not in the
room but his things were there and I sat down on the bed and unwrapped
my puttees and took the shoe off my right foot. Then I lay back on the
bed. I was tired and my right foot hurt. It seemed silly to lie on the
bed with one shoe off, so I sat up and unlaced the other shoe and
dropped it on the floor, then lay back on the blanket again. The room
was stuffy with the window closed but I was too tired to get up and open
it. I saw my things were all in one corner of the room. Outside it was
getting dark. I lay on the bed and thought about Catherine and waited
for Rinaldi. I was going to try not to think about Catherine except at
night before I went to sleep. But now I was tired and there was nothing
to do, so I lay and thought about her. I was thinking about her when
Rinaldi came in. He looked just the same. Perhaps he was a little
thinner.

“Well, baby,” he said. I sat up on the bed. He came over, sat down and
put his arm around me. “Good old baby.” He whacked me on the back and I
held both his arms.

“Old baby,” he said. “Let me see your knee.”

“I’ll have to take off my pants.”

“Take off your pants, baby. We’re all friends here. I want to see what
kind of a job they did.” I stood up, took off the breeches and pulled
off the knee-brace. Rinaldi sat on the floor and bent the knee gently
back and forth. He ran his finger along the scar; put his thumbs
together over the kneecap and rocked the knee gently with his fingers.

“Is that all the articulation you have?”

“Yes.”

“It’s a crime to send you back. They ought to get complete
articulation.”

“It’s a lot better than it was. It was stiff as a board.”

Rinaldi bent it more. I watched his hands. He had fine surgeon’s hands.
I looked at the top of his head, his hair shiny and parted smoothly. He
bent the knee too far.

“Ouch!” I said.

“You ought to have more treatment on it with the machines,” Rinaldi
said.

“It’s better than it was.”

“I see that, baby. This is something I know more about than you.” He
stood up and sat down on the bed. “The knee itself is a good job.” He
was through with the knee. “Tell me all about everything.”

“There’s nothing to tell,” I said. “I’ve led a quiet life.”

“You act like a married man,” he said. “What’s the matter with you?”

“Nothing,” I said. “What’s the matter with you?”

“This war is killing me,” Rinaldi said, “I am very depressed by it.” He
folded his hands over his knee.

“Oh,” I said.

“What’s the matter? Can’t I even have human impulses?”

“No. I can see you’ve been having a fine time. Tell me.”

“All summer and all fall I’ve operated. I work all the time. I do
everybody’s work. All the hard ones they leave to me. By God, baby, I am
becoming a lovely surgeon.”

“That sounds better.”

“I never think. No, by God, I don’t think; I operate.”

“That’s right.”

“But now, baby, it’s all over. I don’t operate now and I feel like hell.
This is a terrible war, baby. You believe me when I say it. Now you
cheer me up. Did you bring the phonograph records?”

“Yes.”

They were wrapped in paper in a cardboard box in my rucksack. I was too
tired to get them out.

“Don’t you feel good yourself, baby?”

“I feel like hell.”

“This war is terrible,” Rinaldi said. “Come on. We’ll both get drunk and
be cheerful. Then we’ll go get the ashes dragged. Then we’ll feel fine.”

“I’ve had the jaundice,” I said, “and I can’t get drunk.”

“Oh, baby, how you’ve come back to me. You come back serious and with a
liver. I tell you this war is a bad thing. Why did we make it anyway?”

“We’ll have a drink. I don’t want to get drunk but we’ll have a drink.”

Rinaldi went across the room to the washstand and brought back two
glasses and a bottle of cognac.

“It’s Austrian cognac,” he said. “Seven stars. It’s all they captured on
San Gabriele.”

“Were you up there?”

“No. I haven’t been anywhere. I’ve been here all the time operating.
Look, baby, this is your old toothbrushing glass. I kept it all the time
to remind me of you.”

“To remind you to brush your teeth.”

“No. I have my own too. I kept this to remind me of you trying to brush
away the Villa Rossa from your teeth in the morning, swearing and eating
aspirin and cursing harlots. Every time I see that glass I think of you
trying to clean your conscience with a toothbrush.” He came over to the
bed. “Kiss me once and tell me you’re not serious.”

“I never kiss you. You’re an ape.”

“I know, you are the fine good Anglo-Saxon boy. I know. You are the
remorse boy, I know. I will wait till I see the Anglo-Saxon brushing
away harlotry with a toothbrush.”

“Put some cognac in the glass.”

We touched glasses and drank. Rinaldi laughed at me.

“I will get you drunk and take out your liver and put you in a good
Italian liver and make you a man again.”

I held the glass for some more cognac. It was dark outside now. Holding
the glass of cognac, I went over and opened the window. The rain had
stopped falling. It was colder outside and there was a mist in the
trees.

“Don’t throw the cognac out the window,” Rinaldi said. “If you can’t
drink it give it to me.”

“Go something yourself,” I said. I was glad to see Rinaldi again. He had
spent two years teasing me and I had always liked it. We understood each
other very well.

“Are you married?” he asked from the bed. I was standing against the
wall by the window.

“Not yet.”

“Are you in love?”

“Yes.”

“With that English girl?”

“Yes.”

“Poor baby. Is she good to you?”

“Of course.”

“I mean is she good to you practically speaking?”

“Shut up.”

“I will. You will see I am a man of extreme delicacy. Does she——?”

“Rinin,” I said. “Please shut up. If you want to be my friend, shut up.”

“I don’t _want_ to be your friend, baby. I _am_ your friend.”

“Then shut up.”

“All right.”

I went over to the bed and sat down beside Rinaldi. He was holding his
glass and looking at the floor.

“You see how it is, Rinin?”

“Oh, yes. All my life I encounter sacred subjects. But very few with
you. I suppose you must have them too.” He looked at the floor.

“You haven’t any?”

“No.”

“Not any?”

“No.”

“I can say this about your mother and that about your sister?”

“And that about _your sister_,” Rinaldi said swiftly. We both laughed.

“The old superman,” I said.

“I am jealous maybe,” Rinaldi said.

“No, you’re not.”

“I don’t mean like that. I mean something else. Have you any married
friends?”

“Yes,” I said.

“I haven’t,” Rinaldi said. “Not if they love each other.”

“Why not?”

“They don’t like me.”

“Why not?”

“I am the snake. I am the snake of reason.”

“You’re getting it mixed. The apple was reason.”

“No, it was the snake.” He was more cheerful.

“You are better when you don’t think so deeply,” I said.

“I love you, baby,” he said. “You puncture me when I become a great
Italian thinker. But I know many things I can’t say. I know more than
you.”

“Yes. You do.”

“But you will have a better time. Even with remorse you will have a
better time.”

“I don’t think so.”

“Oh, yes. That is true. Already I am only happy when I am working.” He
looked at the floor again.

“You’ll get over that.”

“No. I only like two other things; one is bad for my work and the other
is over in half an hour or fifteen minutes. Sometimes less.”

“Sometimes a good deal less.”

“Perhaps I have improved, baby. You do not know. But there are only the
two things and my work.”

“You’ll get other things.”

“No. We never get anything. We are born with all we have and we never
learn. We never get anything new. We all start complete. You should be
glad not to be a Latin.”

“There’s no such thing as a Latin. That is ‘Latin’ thinking. You are so
proud of your defects.” Rinaldi looked up and laughed.

“We’ll stop, baby. I am tired from thinking so much.” He had looked
tired when he came in. “It’s nearly time to eat. I’m glad you’re back.
You are my best friend and my war brother.”

“When do the war brothers eat?” I asked.

“Right away. We’ll drink once more for your liver’s sake.”

“Like Saint Paul.”

“You are inaccurate. That was wine and the stomach. Take a little wine
for your stomach’s sake.”

“Whatever you have in the bottle,” I said. “For any sake you mention.”

“To your girl,” Rinaldi said. He held out his glass.

“All right.”

“I’ll never say a dirty thing about her.”

“Don’t strain yourself.”

He drank off the cognac. “I am pure,” he said. “I am like you, baby. I
will get an English girl too. As a matter of fact I knew your girl first
but she was a little tall for me. A tall girl for a sister,” he quoted.

“You have a lovely pure mind,” I said.

“Haven’t I? That’s why they call me Rinaldo Purissimo.”

“Rinaldo Sporchissimo.”

“Come on, baby, we’ll go down to eat while my mind is still pure.”

I washed, combed my hair and we went down the stairs. Rinaldi was a
little drunk. In the room where we ate, the meal was not quite ready.

“I’ll go get the bottle,” Rinaldi said. He went off up the stairs. I sat
at the table and he came back with the bottle and poured us each a half
tumbler of cognac.

“Too much,” I said and held up the glass and sighted at the lamp on the
table.

“Not for an empty stomach. It is a wonderful thing. It burns out the
stomach completely. Nothing is worse for you.”

“All right.”

“Self-destruction day by day,” Rinaldi said. “It ruins the stomach and
makes the hand shake. Just the thing for a surgeon.”

“You recommend it?”

“Heartily. I use no other. Drink it down, baby, and look forward to
being sick.”

I drank half the glass. In the hall I could hear the orderly calling.
“Soup! Soup is ready!”

The major came in, nodded to us and sat down. He seemed very small at
table.

“Is this all we are?” he asked. The orderly put the soup bowl down and
he ladled out a plate full.

“We are all,” Rinaldi said. “Unless the priest comes. If he knew
Federico was here he would be here.”

“Where is he?” I asked.

“He’s at 307,” the major said. He was busy with his soup. He wiped his
mouth, wiping his upturned gray mustache carefully. “He will come I
think. I called them and left word to tell him you were here.”

“I miss the noise of the mess,” I said.

“Yes, it’s quiet,” the major said.

“I will be noisy,” said Rinaldi.

“Drink some wine, Enrico,” said the major. He filled my glass. The
spaghetti came in and we were all busy. We were finishing the spaghetti
when the priest came in. He was the same as ever, small and brown and
compact looking. I stood up and we shook hands. He put his hand on my
shoulder.

“I came as soon as I heard,” he said.

“Sit down,” the major said. “You’re late.”

“Good-evening, priest,” Rinaldi said, using the English word. They had
taken that up from the priest-baiting captain, who spoke a little
English. “Good-evening, Rinaldo,” the priest said. The orderly brought
him soup but he said he would start with the spaghetti.

“How are you?” he asked me.

“Fine,” I said. “How have things been?”

“Drink some wine, priest,” Rinaldi said. “Take a little wine for your
stomach’s sake. That’s Saint Paul, you know.”

“Yes I know,” said the priest politely. Rinaldi filled his glass.

“That Saint Paul,” said Rinaldi. “He’s the one who makes all the
trouble.” The priest looked at me and smiled. I could see that the
baiting did not touch him now.

“That Saint Paul,” Rinaldi said. “He was a rounder and a chaser and then
when he was no longer hot he said it was no good. When he was finished
he made the rules for us who are still hot. Isn’t it true, Federico?”

The major smiled. We were eating meat stew now.

“I never discuss a Saint after dark,” I said. The priest looked up from
the stew and smiled at me.

“There he is, gone over with the priest,” Rinaldi said. “Where are all
the good old priest-baiters? Where is Cavalcanti? Where is Brundi? Where
is Cesare? Do I have to bait this priest alone without support?”

“He is a good priest,” said the major.

“He is a good priest,” said Rinaldi. “But still a priest. I try to make
the mess like the old days. I want to make Federico happy. To hell with
you, priest!”

I saw the major look at him and notice that he was drunk. His thin face
was white. The line of his hair was very black against the white of his
forehead.

“It’s all right, Rinaldo,” said the priest. “It’s all right.”

“To hell with you,” said Rinaldi. “To hell with the whole damn
business.” He sat back in his chair.

“He’s been under a strain and he’s tired,” the major said to me. He
finished his meat and wiped up the gravy with a piece of bread.

“I don’t give a damn,” Rinaldi said to the table. “To hell with the
whole business.” He looked defiantly around the table, his eyes flat,
his face pale.

“All right,” I said. “To hell with the whole damn business.”

“No, no,” said Rinaldi. “You can’t do it. You can’t do it. I say you
can’t do it. You’re dry and you’re empty and there’s nothing else.
There’s nothing else I tell you. Not a damned thing. I know, when I stop
working.”

The priest shook his head. The orderly took away the stew dish.

“What are you eating meat for?” Rinaldi turned to the priest. “Don’ you
know it’s Friday?”

“It’s Thursday,” the priest said.

“It’s a lie. It’s Friday. You’re eating the body of our Lord. It’s
God-meat. I know. It’s dead Austrian. That’s what you’re eating.”

“The white meat is from officers,” I said, completing the old joke.

Rinaldi laughed. He filled his glass.

“Don’t mind me,” he said. “I’m just a little crazy.”

“You ought to have a leave,” the priest said.

The major shook his head at him. Rinaldi looked at the priest.

“You think I ought to have a leave?”

The major shook his head at the priest. Rinaldi was looking at the
priest.

“Just as you like,” the priest said. “Not if you don’t want.”

“To hell with you,” Rinaldi said. “They try to get rid of me. Every
night they try to get rid of me. I fight them off. What if I have it.
Everybody has it. The whole world’s got it. First,” he went on, assuming
the manner of a lecturer, “it’s a little pimple. Then we notice a rash
between the shoulders. Then we notice nothing at all. We put our faith
in mercury.”

“Or salvarsan,” the major interrupted quietly.

“A mercurial product,” Rinaldi said. He acted very elated now. “I know
something worth two of that. Good old priest,” he said. “You’ll never
get it. Baby will get it. It’s an industrial accident. It’s a simple
industrial accident.”

The orderly brought in the sweet and coffee. The dessert was a sort of
black bread pudding with hard sauce. The lamp was smoking; the black
smoke going close up inside the chimney.

“Bring two candles and take away the lamp,” the major said. The orderly
brought two lighted candles each in a saucer, and took out the lamp
blowing it out. Rinaldi was quiet now. He seemed all right. We talked
and after the coffee we all went out into the hall.

“You want to talk to the priest. I have to go in the town,” Rinaldi
said. “Good-night, priest.”

“Good-night, Rinaldo,” the priest said.

“I’ll see you Fredi,” Rinaldi said.

“Yes,” I said. “Come in early.” He made a face and went out the door.
The major was standing with us. “He’s very tired and overworked,” he
said. “He thinks too he has syphilis. I don’t believe it but he may
have. He is treating himself for it. Good-night. You will leave before
daylight, Enrico?”

“Yes.”

“Good-by then,” he said. “Good luck. Peduzzi will wake you and go with
you.”

“Good-by, Signor Maggiore.”

“Good-by. They talk about an Austrian offensive but I don’t believe it.
I hope not. But anyway it won’t be here. Gino will tell you everything.
The telephone works well now.”

“I’ll call regularly.”

“Please do. Good-night. Don’t let Rinaldi drink so much brandy.”

“I’ll try not to.”

“Good-night, priest.”

“Good-night, Signor Maggiore.”

He went off into his office.




                              CHAPTER XXVI

I went to the door and looked out. It had stopped raining but there was
a mist.

“Should we go upstairs?” I asked the priest.

“I can only stay a little while.”

“Come on up.”

We climbed the stairs and went into my room. I lay down on Rinaldi’s
bed. The priest sat on my cot that the orderly had set up. It was dark
in the room.

“Well,” he said, “how are you really?”

“I’m all right. I’m tired to-night.”

“I’m tired too, but from no cause.”

“What about the war?”

“I think it will be over soon. I don’t know why, but I feel it.”

“How do you feel it?”

“You know how your major is? Gentle? Many people are like that now.”

“I feel that way myself,” I said.

“It has been a terrible summer,” said the priest. He was surer of
himself now than when I had gone away. “You cannot believe how it has
been. Except that you have been there and you know how it can be. Many
people have realized the war this summer. Officers whom I thought could
never realize it realize it now.”

“What will happen?” I stroked the blanket with my hand.

“I do not know but I do not think it can go on much longer.”

“What will happen?”

“They will stop fighting.”

“Who?”

“Both sides.”

“I hope so,” I said.

“You don’t believe it?”

“I don’t believe both sides will stop fighting at once.”

“I suppose not. It is too much to expect. But when I see the changes in
men I do not think it can go on.”

“Who won the fighting this summer?”

“No one.”

“The Austrians won,” I said. “They kept them from taking San Gabriele.
They’ve won. They won’t stop fighting.”

“If they feel as we feel they may stop. They have gone through the same
thing.”

“No one ever stopped when they were winning.”

“You discourage me.”

“I can only say what I think.”

“Then you think it will go on and on? Nothing will ever happen?”

“I don’t know. I only think the Austrians will not stop when they have
won a victory. It is in defeat that we become Christian.”

“The Austrians are Christians—except for the Bosnians.”

“I don’t mean technically Christian. I mean like Our Lord.”

He said nothing.

“We are all gentler now because we are beaten. How would Our Lord have
been if Peter had rescued him in the Garden?”

“He would have been just the same.”

“I don’t think so,” I said.

“You discourage me,” he said. “I believe and I pray that something will
happen. I have felt it very close.”

“Something may happen,” I said. “But it will happen only to us. If they
felt the way we do, it would be all right. But they have beaten us. They
feel another way.”

“Many of the soldiers have always felt this way. It is not because they
were beaten.”

“They were beaten to start with. They were beaten when they took them
from their farms and put them in the army. That is why the peasant has
wisdom, because he is defeated from the start. Put him in power and see
how wise he is.”

He did not say anything. He was thinking.

“Now I am depressed myself,” I said. “That’s why I never think about
these things. I never think and yet when I begin to talk I say the
things I have found out in my mind without thinking.”

“I had hoped for something.”

“Defeat?”

“No. Something more.”

“There isn’t anything more. Except victory. It may be worse.”

“I hoped for a long time for victory.”

“Me too.”

“Now I don’t know.”

“It has to be one or the other.”

“I don’t believe in victory any more.”

“I don’t. But I don’t believe in defeat. Though it may be better.”

“What do you believe in?”

“In sleep,” I said. He stood up.

“I am very sorry to have stayed so long. But I like so to talk with
you.”

“It is very nice to talk again. I said that about sleeping, meaning
nothing.”

We stood up and shook hands in the dark.

“I sleep at 307 now,” he said.

“I go out on post early to-morrow.”

“I’ll see you when you come back.”

“We’ll have a walk and talk together.” I walked with him to the door.

“Don’t go down,” he said. “It is very nice that you are back. Though not
so nice for you.” He put his hand on my shoulder.

“It’s all right for me,” I said. “Good-night.”

“Good-night. Ciaou!”

“Ciaou!” I said. I was deadly sleepy.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

I woke when Rinaldi came in but he did not talk and I went back to sleep
again. In the morning I was dressed and gone before it was light.
Rinaldi did not wake when I left.

I had not seen the Bainsizza before and it was strange to go up the
slope where the Austrians had been, beyond the place on the river where
I had been wounded. There was a steep new road and many trucks. Beyond,
the road flattened out and I saw woods and steep hills in the mist.
There were woods that had been taken quickly and not smashed. Then
beyond where the road was not protected by the hills it was screened by
matting on the sides and over the top. The road ended in a wrecked
village. The lines were up beyond. There was much artillery around. The
houses were badly smashed but things were very well organized and there
were signboards everywhere. We found Gino and he got us some coffee and
later I went with him and met various people and saw the posts. Gino
said the British cars were working further down the Bainsizza at Ravne.
He had great admiration for the British. There was still a certain
amount of shelling, he said, but not many wounded. There would be many
sick now the rains had started. The Austrians were supposed to attack
but he did not believe it. We were supposed to attack too, but they had
not brought up any new troops so he thought that was off too. Food was
scarce and he would be glad to get a full meal in Gorizia. What kind of
supper had I had? I told him and he said that would be wonderful. He was
especially impressed by the _dolce_. I did not describe it in detail,
only said it was a _dolce_, and I think he believed it was something
more elaborate than bread pudding.

Did I know where he was going to go? I said I didn’t but that some of
the other cars were at Caporetto. He hoped he would go up that way. It
was a nice little place and he liked the high mountain hauling up
beyond. He was a nice boy and every one seemed to like him. He said
where it really had been hell was at San Gabriele and the attack beyond
Lom that had gone bad. He said the Austrians had a great amount of
artillery in the woods along Ternova ridge beyond and above us, and
shelled the roads badly at night. There was a battery of naval guns that
had gotten on his nerves. I would recognize them because of their flat
trajectory. You heard the report and then the shriek commenced almost
instantly. They usually fired two guns at once, one right after the
other, and the fragments from the burst were enormous. He showed me one,
a smoothly jagged piece of metal over a foot long. It looked like
babbiting metal.

“I don’t suppose they are so effective,” Gino said. “But they scare me.
They all sound as though they came directly for you. There is the boom,
then instantly the shriek and burst. What’s the use of not being wounded
if they scare you to death?”

He said there were Croats in the lines opposite us now and some Magyars.
Our troops were still in the attacking positions. There was no wire to
speak of and no place to fall back to if there should be an Austrian
attack. There were fine positions for defense along the low mountains
that came up out of the plateau but nothing had been done about
organizing them for defense. What did I think about the Bainsizza
anyway?

I had expected it to be flatter, more like a plateau. I had not realized
it was so broken up.

“Alto piano,” Gino said, “but no piano.”

We went back to the cellar of the house where he lived. I said I thought
a ridge that flattened out on top and had a little depth would be easier
and more practical to hold than a succession of small mountains. It was
no harder to attack up a mountain than on the level, I argued. “That
depends on the mountains,” he said. “Look at San Gabriele.”

“Yes,” I said, “but where they had trouble was at the top where it was
flat. They got up to the top easy enough.”

“Not so easy,” he said.

“Yes,” I said, “but that was a special case because it was a fortress
rather than a mountain, anyway. The Austrians had been fortifying it for
years.” I meant tactically speaking in a war where there was some
movement a succession of mountains were nothing to hold as a line
because it was too easy to turn them. You should have possible mobility
and a mountain is not very mobile. Also, people always over-shoot down
hill. If the flank were turned, the best men would be left on the
highest mountains. I did not believe in a war in mountains. I had
thought about it a lot, I said. You pinched off one mountain and they
pinched off another but when something really started every one had to
get down off the mountains.

What were you going to do if you had a mountain frontier? he asked.

I had not worked that out yet, I said, and we both laughed. “But,” I
said, “in the old days the Austrians were always whipped in the
quadrilateral around Verona. They let them come down onto the plain and
whipped them there.”

“Yes,” said Gino. “But those were Frenchmen and you can work out
military problems clearly when you are fighting in somebody else’s
country.”

“Yes,” I agreed, “when it is your own country you cannot use it so
scientifically.”

“The Russians did, to trap Napoleon.”

“Yes, but they had plenty of country. If you tried to retreat to trap
Napoleon in Italy you would find yourself in Brindisi.”

“A terrible place,” said Gino. “Have you ever been there?”

“Not to stay.”

“I am a patriot,” Gino said. “But I cannot love Brindisi or Taranto.”

“Do you love the Bainsizza?” I asked.

“The soil is sacred,” he said. “But I wish it grew more potatoes. You
know when we came here we found fields of potatoes the Austrians had
planted.”

“Has the food really been short?”

“I myself have never had enough to eat but I am a big eater and I have
not starved. The mess is average. The regiments in the line get pretty
good food but those in support don’t get so much. Something is wrong
somewhere. There should be plenty of food.”

“The dogfish are selling it somewhere else.”

“Yes, they give the battalions in the front line as much as they can but
the ones in back are very short. They have eaten all the Austrians’
potatoes and chestnuts from the woods. They ought to feed them better.
We are big eaters. I am sure there is plenty of food. It is very bad for
the soldiers to be short of food. Have you ever noticed the difference
it makes in the way you think?”

“Yes,” I said. “It can’t win a war but it can lose one.”

“We won’t talk about losing. There is enough talk about losing. What has
been done this summer cannot have been done in vain.”

I did not say anything. I was always embarrassed by the words sacred,
glorious, and sacrifice and the expression in vain. We had heard them,
sometimes standing in the rain almost out of earshot, so that only the
shouted words came through, and had read them, on proclamations that
were slapped up by billposters over other proclamations, now for a long
time, and I had seen nothing sacred, and the things that were glorious
had no glory and the sacrifices were like the stockyards at Chicago if
nothing was done with the meat except to bury it. There were many words
that you could not stand to hear and finally only the names of places
had dignity. Certain numbers were the same way and certain dates and
these with the names of the places were all you could say and have them
mean anything. Abstract words such as glory, honor, courage, or hallow
were obscene beside the concrete names of villages, the numbers of
roads, the names of rivers, the numbers of regiments and the dates. Gino
was a patriot, so he said things that separated us sometimes, but he was
also a fine boy and I understood his being a patriot. He was born one.
He left with Peduzzi in the car to go back to Gorizia.

It stormed all that day. The wind drove down the rain and everywhere
there was standing water and mud. The plaster of the broken houses was
gray and wet. Late in the afternoon the rain stopped and from out number
two post I saw the bare wet autumn country with clouds over the tops of
the hills and the straw screening over the roads wet and dripping. The
sun came out once before it went down and shone on the bare woods beyond
the ridge. There were many Austrian guns in the woods on that ridge but
only a few fired. I watched the sudden round puffs of shrapnel smoke in
the sky above a broken farmhouse near where the line was; soft puffs
with a yellow white flash in the centre. You saw the flash, then heard
the crack, then saw the smoke ball distort and thin in the wind. There
were many iron shrapnel balls in the rubble of the houses and on the
road beside the broken house where the post was, but they did not shell
near the post that afternoon. We loaded two cars and drove down the road
that was screened with wet mats and the last of the sun came through in
the breaks between the strips of mattings. Before we were out on the
clear road behind the hill the sun was down. We went on down the clear
road and as it turned a corner into the open and went into the square
arched tunnel of matting the rain started again.

The wind rose in the night and at three o’clock in the morning with the
rain coming in sheets there was a bombardment and the Croatians came
over across the mountain meadows and through patches of woods and into
the front line. They fought in the dark in the rain and a counter-attack
of scared men from the second line drove them back. There was much
shelling and many rockets in the rain and machine-gun and rifle fire all
along the line. They did not come again and it was quieter and between
the gusts of wind and rain we could hear the sound of a great
bombardment far to the north.

The wounded were coming into the post, some were carried on stretchers,
some walking and some were brought on the backs of men that came across
the field. They were wet to the skin and all were scared. We filled two
cars with stretcher cases as they came up from the cellar of the post
and as I shut the door of the second car and fastened it I felt the rain
on my face turn to snow. The flakes were coming heavy and fast in the
rain.

When daylight came the storm was still blowing but the snow had stopped.
It had melted as it fell on the wet ground and now it was raining again.
There was another attack just after daylight but it was unsuccessful. We
expected an attack all day but it did not come until the sun was going
down. The bombardment started to the south below the long wooded ridge
where the Austrian guns were concentrated. We expected a bombardment but
it did not come. It was getting dark. Guns were firing from the field
behind the village and the shells, going away, had a comfortable sound.

We heard that the attack to the south had been unsuccessful. They did
not attack that night but we heard that they had broken through to the
north. In the night word came that we were to prepare to retreat. The
captain at the post told me this. He had it from the Brigade. A little
while later he came from the telephone and said it was a lie. The
Brigade had received orders that the line of the Bainsizza should be
held no matter what happened. I asked about the break through and he
said that he had heard at the Brigade that the Austrians had broken
through the twenty-seventh army corps up toward Caporetto. There had
been a great battle in the north all day.

“If those bastards let them through we are cooked,” he said.

“It’s Germans that are attacking,” one of the medical officers said. The
word Germans was something to be frightened of. We did not want to have
anything to do with the Germans.

“There are fifteen divisions of Germans,” the medical officer said.
“They have broken through and we will be cut off.”

“At the Brigade, they say this line is to be held. They say they have
not broken through badly and that we will hold a line across the
mountains from Monte Maggiore.”

“Where do they hear this?”

“From the Division.”

“The word that we were to retreat came from the Division.”

“We work under the Army Corps,” I said. “But here I work under you.
Naturally when you tell me to go I will go. But get the orders
straight.”

“The orders are that we stay here. You clear the wounded from here to
the clearing station.”

“Sometimes we clear from the clearing station to the field hospitals
too,” I said. “Tell me, I have never seen a retreat—if there is a
retreat how are all the wounded evacuated?”

“They are not. They take as many as they can and leave the rest.”

“What will I take in the cars?”

“Hospital equipment.”

“All right,” I said.

The next night the retreat started. We heard that Germans and Austrians
had broken through in the north and were coming down the mountain
valleys toward Cividale and Udine. The retreat was orderly, wet and
sullen. In the night, going slowly along the crowded roads we passed
troops marching under the rain, guns, horses pulling wagons, mules,
motor trucks, all moving away from the front. There was no more disorder
than in an advance.

That night we helped empty the field hospitals that had been set up in
the least ruined villages of the plateau, taking the wounded down to
Plava on the river-bed: and the next day hauled all day in the rain to
evacuate the hospitals and clearing station at Plava. It rained steadily
and the army of the Bainsizza moved down off the plateau in the October
rain and across the river where the great victories had commenced in the
spring of that year. We came into Gorizia in the middle of the next day.
The rain had stopped and the town was nearly empty. As we came up the
street they were loading the girls from the soldiers’ whorehouse into a
truck. There were seven girls and they had on their hats and coats and
carried small suitcases. Two of them were crying. Of the others one
smiled at us and put out her tongue and fluttered it up and down. She
had thick full lips and black eyes.

I stopped the car and went over and spoke to the matron. The girls from
the officers’ house had left early that morning, she said. Where were
they going? To Conegliano, she said. The truck started. The girl with
thick lips put out her tongue again at us. The matron waved. The two
girls kept on crying. The others looked interestedly out at the town. I
got back in the car.

“We ought to go with them,” Bonello said. “That would be a good trip.”

“We’ll have a good trip,” I said.

“We’ll have a hell of a trip.”

“That’s what I mean,” I said. We came up the drive to the villa.

“I’d like to be there when some of those tough babies climb in and try
and hop them.”

“You think they will?”

“Sure. Everybody in the Second Army knows that matron.”

We were outside the villa.

“They call her the Mother Superior,” Bonello said. “The girls are new
but everybody knows her. They must have brought them up just before the
retreat.”

“They’ll have a time.”

“I’ll say they’ll have a time. I’d like to have a crack at them for
nothing. They charge too much at that house anyway. The government gyps
us.”

“Take the car out and have the mechanics go over it,” I said. “Change
the oil and check the differential. Fill it up and then get some sleep.”

“Yes, Signor Tenente.”

The villa was empty. Rinaldi was gone with the hospital. The major was
gone taking hospital personnel in the staff car. There was a note on the
window for me to fill the cars with the material piled in the hall and
to proceed to Pordenone. The mechanics were gone already. I went out
back to the garage. The other two cars came in while I was there and
their drivers got down. It was starting to rain again.

“I’m so —— sleepy I went to sleep three times coming here from Plava,”
Piani said. “What are we going to do, Tenente?”

“We’ll change the oil, grease them, fill them up, then take them around
in front and load up the junk they’ve left.”

“Then do we start?”

“No, we’ll sleep for three hours.”

“Christ I’m glad to sleep,” Bonello said. “I couldn’t keep awake
driving.”

“How’s your car, Aymo?” I asked.

“It’s all right.”

“Get me a monkey suit and I’ll help you with the oil.”

“Don’t you do that, Tenente,” Aymo said. “It’s nothing to do. You go and
pack your things.”

“My things are all packed,” I said. “I’ll go and carry out the stuff
that they left for us. Bring the cars around as soon as they’re ready.”

They brought the cars around to the front of the villa and we loaded
them with the hospital equipment which was piled in the hallway. When it
was all in, the three cars stood in line down the driveway under the
trees in the rain. We went inside.

“Make a fire in the kitchen and dry your things,” I said.

“I don’t care about dry clothes,” Piani said. “I want to sleep.”

“I’m going to sleep on the major’s bed,” Bonello said. “I’m going to
sleep where the old man corks off.”

“I don’t care where I sleep,” Piani said.

“There are two beds in here.” I opened the door.

“I never knew what was in that room,” Bonello said.

“That was old fish-face’s room,” Piani said.

“You two sleep in there,” I said. “I’ll wake you.”

“The Austrians will wake us if you sleep too long, Tenente,” Bonello
said.

“I won’t oversleep,” I said. “Where’s Aymo?”

“He went out in the kitchen.”

“Get to sleep,” I said.

“I’ll sleep,” Piani said. “I’ve been asleep sitting up all day. The
whole top of my head kept coming down over my eyes.”

“Take your boots off,” Bonello said. “That’s old fish-face’s bed.”

“Fish-face is nothing to me.” Piani lay on the bed, his muddy boots
straight out, his head on his arm. I went out to the kitchen. Aymo had a
fire in the stove and a kettle of water on.

“I thought I’d start some _pasta asciutta_,” he said. “We’ll be hungry
when we wake up.”

“Aren’t you sleepy, Bartolomeo?”

“Not so sleepy. When the water boils I’ll leave it. The fire will go
down.”

“You’d better get some sleep,” I said. “We can eat cheese and monkey
meat.”

“This is better,” he said. “Something hot will be good for those two
anarchists. You go to sleep, Tenente.”

“There’s a bed in the major’s room.”

“You sleep there.”

“No, I’m going up to my old room. Do you want a drink, Bartolomeo?”

“When we go, Tenente. Now it wouldn’t do me any good.”

“If you wake in three hours and I haven’t called you, wake me, will
you?”

“I haven’t any watch, Tenente.”

“There’s a clock on the wall in the major’s room.”

“All right.”

I went out then through the dining-room and the hall and up the marble
stairs to the room where I had lived with Rinaldi. It was raining
outside. I went to the window and looked out. It was getting dark and I
saw the three cars standing in line under the trees. The trees were
dripping in the rain. It was cold and the drops hung to the branches. I
went back to Rinaldi’s bed and lay down and let sleep take me.

We ate in the kitchen before we started. Aymo had a basin of spaghetti
with onions and tinned meat chopped up in it. We sat around the table
and drank two bottles of the wine that had been left in the cellar of
the villa. It was dark outside and still raining. Piani sat at the table
very sleepy.

“I like a retreat better than an advance,” Bonello said. “On a retreat
we drink barbera.”

“We drink it now. To-morrow maybe we drink rain-water,” Aymo said.

“To-morrow we’ll be in Udine. We’ll drink champagne. That’s where the
slackers live. Wake up, Piani! We’ll drink champagne to-morrow in
Udine!”

“I’m awake,” Piani said. He filled his plate with the spaghetti and
meat. “Couldn’t you find tomato sauce, Barto?”

“There wasn’t any,” Aymo said.

“We’ll drink champagne in Udine,” Bonello said. He filled his glass with
the clear red barbera.

“We may drink —— before Udine,” Piani said.

“Have you eaten enough, Tenente?” Aymo asked.

“I’ve got plenty. Give me the bottle, Bartolomeo.”

“I have a bottle apiece to take in the cars,” Aymo said.

“Did you sleep at all?”

“I don’t need much sleep. I slept a little.”

“To-morrow we’ll sleep in the king’s bed,” Bonello said. He was feeling
very good.

“To-morrow maybe we’ll sleep in ——,” Piani said.

“I’ll sleep with the queen,” Bonello said. He looked to see how I took
the joke.

“You’ll sleep with ——,” Piani said sleepily.

“That’s treason, Tenente,” Bonello said. “Isn’t that treason?”

“Shut up,” I said. “You get too funny with a little wine.” Outside it
was raining hard. I looked at my watch. It was half-past nine.

“It’s time to roll,” I said and stood up.

“Who are you going to ride with, Tenente?” Bonello asked.

“With Aymo. Then you come. Then Piani. We’ll start out on the road for
Cormons.”

“I’m afraid I’ll go to sleep,” Piani said.

“All right. I’ll ride with you. Then Bonello. Then Aymo.”

“That’s the best way,” Piani said. “Because I’m so sleepy.”

“I’ll drive and you sleep awhile.”

“No. I can drive just so long as I know somebody will wake me up if I go
to sleep.”

“I’ll wake you up. Put out the lights, Barto.”

“You might as well leave them,” Bonello said. “We’ve got no more use for
this place.”

“I have a small locker trunk in my room,” I said. “Will you help take it
down, Piani?”

“We’ll take it,” Piani said. “Come on, Aldo.” He went off into the hall
with Bonello. I heard them going upstairs.

“This was a fine place,” Bartolomeo Aymo said. He put two bottles of
wine and half a cheese into his haversack. “There won’t be a place like
this again. Where will they retreat to, Tenente?”

“Beyond the Tagliamento, they say. The hospital and the sector are to be
at Pordenone.”

“This is a better town than Pordenone.”

“I don’t know Pordenone,” I said. “I’ve just been through there.”

“It’s not much of a place,” Aymo said.




                             CHAPTER XXVIII

As we moved out through the town it was empty in the rain and the dark
except for columns of troops and guns that were going through the main
street. There were many trucks too and some carts going through on other
streets and converging on the main road. When we were out past the
tanneries onto the main road the troops, the motor trucks, the
horse-drawn carts and the guns were in one wide slow-moving column. We
moved slowly but steadily in the rain, the radiator cap of our car
almost against the tailboard of a truck that was loaded high, the load
covered with wet canvas. Then the truck stopped. The whole column was
stopped. It started again and we went a little farther, then stopped. I
got out and walked ahead, going between the trucks and carts and under
the wet necks of the horses. The block was farther ahead. I left the
road, crossed the ditch on a footboard and walked along the field beyond
the ditch. I could see the stalled column between the trees in the rain
as I went forward across from it in the field. I went about a mile. The
column did not move, although, on the other side beyond the stalled
vehicles I could see the troops moving. I went back to the cars. This
block might extend as far as Udine. Piani was asleep over the wheel. I
climbed up beside him and went to sleep too. Several hours later I heard
the truck ahead of us grinding into gear. I woke Piani and we started,
moving a few yards, then stopping, then going on again. It was still
raining.

The column stalled again in the night and did not start. I got down and
went back to see Aymo and Bonello. Bonello had two sergeants of
engineers on the seat of his car with him. They stiffened when I came
up.

“They were left to do something to a bridge,” Bonello said. “They can’t
find their unit so I gave them a ride.”

“With the Sir Lieutenant’s permission.”

“With permission,” I said.

“The lieutenant is an American,” Bonello said. “He’ll give anybody a
ride.”

One of the sergeants smiled. The other asked Bonello if I was an Italian
from North or South America.

“He’s not an Italian. He’s North American English.”

The sergeants were polite but did not believe it. I left them and went
back to Aymo. He had two girls on the seat with him and was sitting back
in the corner and smoking.

“Barto, Barto,” I said. He laughed.

“Talk to them, Tenente,” he said. “I can’t understand them. Hey!” he put
his hand on the girl’s thigh and squeezed it in a friendly way. The girl
drew her shawl tight around her and pushed his hand away. “Hey!” he
said. “Tell the Tenente your name and what you’re doing here.”

The girl looked at me fiercely. The other girl kept her eyes down. The
girl who looked at me said something in a dialect I could not understand
a word of. She was plump and dark and looked about sixteen.

“Sorella?” I asked and pointed at the other girl.

She nodded her head and smiled.

“All right,” I said and patted her knee. I felt her stiffen away when I
touched her. The sister never looked up. She looked perhaps a year
younger. Aymo put his hand on the elder girl’s thigh and she pushed it
away. He laughed at her.

“Good man,” he pointed at himself. “Good man,” he pointed at me. “Don’t
you worry.” The girl looked at him fiercely. The pair of them were like
two wild birds.

“What does she ride with me for if she doesn’t like me?” Aymo asked.
“They got right up in the car the minute I motioned to them.” He turned
to the girl. “Don’t worry,” he said. “No danger of ——,” using the
vulgar word. “No place for ——.” I could see she understood the word
and that was all. Her eyes looked at him very scared. She pulled the
shawl tight. “Car all full,” Aymo said. “No danger of ——. No place for
——.” Every time he said the word the girl stiffened a little. Then
sitting stiffly and looking at him she began to cry. I saw her lips
working and then tears came down her plump cheeks. Her sister, not
looking up, took her hand and they sat there together. The older one,
who had been so fierce, began to sob.

“I guess I scared her,” Aymo said. “I didn’t mean to scare her.”

Bartolomeo brought out his knapsack and cut off two pieces of cheese.
“Here,” he said. “Stop crying.”

The older girl shook her head and still cried, but the younger girl took
the cheese and commenced to eat. After a while the younger girl gave her
sister the second piece of cheese and they both ate. The older sister
still sobbed a little.

“She’ll be all right after a while,” Aymo said.

An idea came to him. “Virgin?” he asked the girl next to him. She nodded
her head vigorously. “Virgin too?” he pointed to the sister. Both the
girls nodded their heads and the elder said something in dialect.

“That’s all right,” Bartolomeo said. “That’s all right.”

Both the girls seemed cheered.

I left them sitting together with Aymo sitting back in the corner and
went back to Piani’s car. The column of vehicles did not move but the
troops kept passing alongside. It was still raining hard and I thought
some of the stops in the movement of the column might be from cars with
wet wiring. More likely they were from horses or men going to sleep.
Still, traffic could tie up in cities when every one was awake. It was
the combination of horse and motor vehicles. They did not help each
other any. The peasants’ carts did not help much either. Those were a
couple of fine girls with Barto. A retreat was no place for two virgins.
Real virgins. Probably very religious. If there were no war we would
probably all be in bed. In bed I lay me down my head. Bed and board.
Stiff as a board in bed. Catherine was in bed now between two sheets,
over her and under her. Which side did she sleep on? Maybe she wasn’t
asleep. Maybe she was lying thinking about me. Blow, blow, ye western
wind. Well, it blew and it wasn’t the small rain but the big rain down
that rained. It rained all night. You knew it rained down that rained.
Look at it. Christ, that my love were in my arms and I in my bed again.
That my love Catherine. That my sweet love Catherine down might rain.
Blow her again to me. Well, we were in it. Every one was caught in it
and the small rain would not quiet it. “Good-night, Catherine,” I said
out loud. “I hope you sleep well. If it’s too uncomfortable, darling,
lie on the other side,” I said. “I’ll get you some cold water. In a
little while it will be morning and then it won’t be so bad. I’m sorry
he makes you so uncomfortable. Try and go to sleep, sweet.”

I was asleep all the time, she said. You’ve been talking in your sleep.
Are you all right?

Are you really there?

Of course I’m here. I wouldn’t go way. This doesn’t make any difference
between us.

You’re so lovely and sweet. You wouldn’t go away in the night, would
you?

Of course I wouldn’t go away. I’m always here. I come whenever you want
me.

“——,” Piani said. “They’ve started again.”

“I was dopey,” I said. I looked at my watch. It was three o’clock in the
morning. I reached back behind the seat for a bottle of the barbera.

“You talked out loud,” Piani said.

“I was having a dream in English,” I said.

The rain was slacking and we were moving along. Before daylight we were
stalled again and when it was light we were at a little rise in the
ground and I saw the road of the retreat stretched out far ahead,
everything stationary except for the infantry filtering through. We
started to move again but seeing the rate of progress in the daylight, I
knew we were going to have to get off that main road some way and go
across country if we ever hoped to reach Udine.

In the night many peasants had joined the column from the roads of the
country and in the column there were carts loaded with household goods;
there were mirrors projecting up between mattresses, and chickens and
ducks tied to carts. There was a sewing-machine on the cart ahead of us
in the rain. They had saved the most valuable things. On some carts the
women sat huddled from the rain and others walked beside the carts
keeping as close to them as they could. There were dogs now in the
column, keeping under the wagons as they moved along. The road was
muddy, the ditches at the side were high with water and beyond the trees
that lined the road the fields looked too wet and too soggy to try to
cross. I got down from the car and worked up the road a way, looking for
a place where I could see ahead to find a side-road we could take across
country. I knew there were many side-roads but did not want one that
would lead to nothing. I could not remember them because we had always
passed them bowling along in the car on the main road and they all
looked much alike. Now I knew we must find one if we hoped to get
through. No one knew where the Austrians were nor how things were going
but I was certain that if the rain should stop and planes come over and
get to work on that column that it would be all over. All that was
needed was for a few men to leave their trucks or a few horses be killed
to tie up completely the movement on the road.

The rain was not falling so heavily now and I thought it might clear. I
went ahead along the edge of the road and when there was a small road
that led off to the north between two fields with a hedge of trees on
both sides, I thought that we had better take it and hurried back to the
cars. I told Piani to turn off and went back to tell Bonello and Aymo.

“If it leads nowhere we can turn around and cut back in,” I said.

“What about these?” Bonello asked. His two sergeants were beside him on
the seat. They were unshaven but still military looking in the early
morning.

“They’ll be good to push,” I said. I went back to Aymo and told him we
were going to try it across country.

“What about my virgin family?” Aymo asked. The two girls were asleep.

“They won’t be very useful,” I said. “You ought to have some one that
could push.”

“They could go back in the car,” Aymo said. “There’s room in the car.”

“All right if you want them,” I said. “Pick up somebody with a wide back
to push.”

“Bersaglieri,” Aymo smiled. “They have the widest backs. They measure
them. How do you feel, Tenente?”

“Fine. How are you?”

“Fine. But very hungry.”

“There ought to be something up that road and we will stop and eat.”

“How’s your leg, Tenente?”

“Fine,” I said. Standing on the step and looking up ahead I could see
Piani’s car pulling out onto the little side-road and starting up it,
his car showing through the hedge of bare branches. Bonello turned off
and followed him and then Piani worked his way out and we followed the
two ambulances ahead along the narrow road between hedges. It led to a
farmhouse. We found Piani and Bonello stopped in the farmyard. The house
was low and long with a trellis with a grape-vine over the door. There
was a well in the yard and Piani was getting up water to fill his
radiator. So much going in low gear had boiled it out. The farmhouse was
deserted. I looked back down the road, the farmhouse was on a slight
elevation above the plain, and we could see over the country, and saw
the road, the hedges, the fields and the line of trees along the main
road where the retreat was passing. The two sergeants were looking
through the house. The girls were awake and looking at the courtyard,
the well and the two big ambulances in front of the farmhouse, with
three drivers at the well. One of the sergeants came out with a clock in
his hand.

“Put it back,” I said. He looked at me, went in the house and came back
without the clock.

“Where’s your partner?” I asked.

“He’s gone to the latrine.” He got up on the seat of the ambulance. He
was afraid we would leave him.

“What about breakfast, Tenente?” Bonello asked. “We could eat something.
It wouldn’t take very long.”

“Do you think this road going down on the other side will lead to
anything?”

“Sure.”

“All right. Let’s eat.” Piani and Bonello went in the house.

“Come on,” Aymo said to the girls. He held his hand to help them down.
The older sister shook her head. They were not going into any deserted
house. They looked after us.

“They are difficult,” Aymo said. We went into the farmhouse together. It
was large and dark, an abandoned feeling. Bonello and Piani were in the
kitchen.

“There’s not much to eat,” Piani said. “They’ve cleaned it out.”

Bonello sliced a big white cheese on the heavy kitchen table.

“Where was the cheese?”

“In the cellar. Piani found wine too and apples.”

“That’s a good breakfast.”

Piani was taking the wooden cork out of a big wicker-covered wine jug.
He tipped it and poured a copper pan full.

“It smells all right,” he said. “Find some beakers, Barto.”

The two sergeants came in.

“Have some cheese, sergeants,” Bonello said.

“We should go,” one of the sergeants said, eating his cheese and
drinking a cup of wine.

“We’ll go. Don’t worry,” Bonello said.

“An army travels on its stomach,” I said.

“What?” asked the sergeant.

“It’s better to eat.”

“Yes. But time is precious.”

“I believe the bastards have eaten already,” Piani said. The sergeants
looked at him. They hated the lot of us.

“You know the road?” one of them asked me.

“No,” I said. They looked at each other.

“We would do best to start,” the first one said.

“We are starting,” I said. I drank another cup of the red wine. It
tasted very good after the cheese and apple.

“Bring the cheese,” I said and went out. Bonello came out carrying the
great jug of wine.

“That’s too big,” I said. He looked at it regretfully.

“I guess it is,” he said. “Give me the canteens to fill.” He filled the
canteens and some of the wine ran out on the stone paving of the
courtyard. Then he picked up the wine jug and put it just inside the
door.

“The Austrians can find it without breaking the door down,” he said.

“We’ll roll,” I said. “Piani and I will go ahead.” The two engineers
were already on the seat beside Bonello. The girls were eating cheese
and apples. Aymo was smoking. We started off down the narrow road. I
looked back at the two cars coming and the farmhouse. It was a fine,
low, solid stone house and the ironwork of the well was very good. Ahead
of us the road was narrow and muddy and there was a high hedge on either
side. Behind, the cars were following closely.




                              CHAPTER XXIX

At noon we were stuck in a muddy road about, as nearly as we could
figure, ten kilometres from Udine. The rain had stopped during the
forenoon and three times we had heard planes coming, seen them pass
overhead, watched them go far to the left and heard them bombing on the
main highroad. We had worked through a network of secondary roads and
had taken many roads that were blind, but had always, by backing up and
finding another road, gotten closer to Udine. Now, Aymo’s car, in
backing so that we might get out of a blind road, had gotten into the
soft earth at the side and the wheels, spinning, had dug deeper and
deeper until the car rested on its differential. The thing to do now was
to dig out in front of the wheels, put in brush so that the chains could
grip, and then push until the car was on the road. We were all down on
the road around the car. The two sergeants looked at the car and
examined the wheels. Then they started off down the road without a word.
I went after them.

“Come on,” I said. “Cut some brush.”

“We have to go,” one said.

“Get busy,” I said, “and cut brush.”

“We have to go,” one said. The other said nothing. They were in a hurry
to start. They would not look at me.

“I order you to come back to the car and cut brush,” I said. The one
sergeant turned. “We have to go on. In a little while you will be cut
off. You can’t order us. You’re not our officer.”

“I order you to cut brush,” I said. They turned and started down the
road.

“Halt,” I said. They kept on down the muddy road, the hedge on either
side. “I order you to halt,” I called. They went a little faster. I
opened up my holster, took the pistol, aimed at the one who had talked
the most, and fired. I missed and they both started to run. I shot three
times and dropped one. The other went through the hedge and was out of
sight. I fired at him through the hedge as he ran across the field. The
pistol clicked empty and I put in another clip. I saw it was too far to
shoot at the second sergeant. He was far across the field, running, his
head held low. I commenced to reload the empty clip. Bonello came up.

“Let me go finish him,” he said. I handed him the pistol and he walked
down to where the sergeant of engineers lay face down across the road.
Bonello leaned over, put the pistol against the man’s head and pulled
the trigger. The pistol did not fire.

“You have to cock it,” I said. He cocked it and fired twice. He took
hold of the sergeant’s legs and pulled him to the side of the road so he
lay beside the hedge. He came back and handed me the pistol.

“The son of a bitch,” he said. He looked toward the sergeant. “You see
me shoot him, Tenente?”

“We’ve got to get the brush quickly,” I said. “Did I hit the other one
at all?”

“I don’t think so,” Aymo said. “He was too far away to hit with a
pistol.”

“The dirty scum,” Piani said. We were all cutting twigs and branches.
Everything had been taken out of the car. Bonello was digging out in
front of the wheels. When we were ready Aymo started the car and put it
into gear. The wheels spun round throwing brush and mud. Bonello and I
pushed until we could feel our joints crack. The car would not move.

“Rock her back and forth, Barto,” I said.

He drove the engine in reverse, then forward. The wheels only dug in
deeper. Then the car was resting on the differential again, and the
wheels spun freely in the holes they had dug. I straightened up.

“We’ll try her with a rope,” I said.

“I don’t think it’s any use, Tenente. You can’t get a straight pull.”

“We have to try it,” I said. “She won’t come out any other way.”

Piani’s and Bonello’s cars could only move straight ahead down the
narrow road. We roped both cars together and pulled. The wheels only
pulled sideways against the ruts.

“It’s no good,” I shouted. “Stop it.”

Piani and Bonello got down from their cars and came back. Aymo got down.
The girls were up the road about forty yards sitting on a stone wall.

“What do you say, Tenente?” Bonello asked.

“We’ll dig out and try once more with the brush,” I said. I looked down
the road. It was my fault. I had led them up here. The sun was almost
out from behind the clouds and the body of the sergeant lay beside the
hedge.

“We’ll put his coat and cape under,” I said. Bonello went to get them. I
cut brush and Aymo and Piani dug out in front and between the wheels. I
cut the cape, then ripped it in two, and laid it under the wheel in the
mud, then piled brush for the wheels to catch. We were ready to start
and Aymo got up on the seat and started the car. The wheels spun and we
pushed and pushed. But it wasn’t any use.

“It’s ——ed,” I said. “Is there anything you want in the car, Barto?”

Aymo climbed up with Bonello, carrying the cheese and two bottles of
wine and his cape. Bonello, sitting behind the wheel, was looking
through the pockets of the sergeant’s coat.

“Better throw the coat away,” I said. “What about Barto’s virgins?”

“They can get in the back,” Piani said. “I don’t think we are going
far.”

I opened the back door of the ambulance.

“Come on,” I said. “Get in.” The two girls climbed in and sat in the
corner. They seemed to have taken no notice of the shooting. I looked
back up the road. The sergeant lay in his dirty long-sleeved underwear.
I got up with Piani and we started. We were going to try to cross the
field. When the road entered the field I got down and walked ahead. If
we could get across, there was a road on the other side. We could not
get across. It was too soft and muddy for the cars. When they were
finally and completely stalled, the wheels dug in to the hubs, we left
them in the field and started on foot for Udine.

When we came to the road which led back toward the main highway I
pointed down it to the two girls.

“Go down there,” I said. “You’ll meet people.” They looked at me. I took
out my pocket-book and gave them each a ten-lira note. “Go down there,”
I said, pointing. “Friends! Family!”

They did not understand but they held the money tightly and started down
the road. They looked back as though they were afraid I might take the
money back. I watched them go down the road, their shawls close around
them, looking back apprehensively at us. The three drivers were
laughing.

“How much will you give me to go in that direction, Tenente?” Bonello
asked.

“They’re better off in a bunch of people than alone if they catch them,”
I said.

“Give me two hundred lire and I’ll walk straight back toward Austria,”
Bonello said.

“They’d take it away from you,” Piani said.

“Maybe the war will be over,” Aymo said. We were going up the road as
fast as we could. The sun was trying to come through. Beside the road
were mulberry trees. Through the trees I could see our two big
moving-vans of cars stuck in the field. Piani looked back too.

“They’ll have to build a road to get them out,” he said.

“I wish to Christ we had bicycles,” Bonello said.

“Do they ride bicycles in America?” Aymo asked.

“They used to.”

“Here it is a great thing,” Aymo said. “A bicycle is a splendid thing.”

“I wish to Christ we had bicycles,” Bonello said. “I’m no walker.”

“Is that firing?” I asked. I thought I could hear firing a long way
away.

“I don’t know,” Aymo said. He listened.

“I think so,” I said.

“The first thing we will see will be the cavalry,” Piani said.

“I don’t think they’ve got any cavalry.”

“I hope to Christ not,” Bonello said. “I don’t want to be stuck on a
lance by any —— cavalry.”

“You certainly shot that sergeant, Tenente,” Piani said. We were walking
fast.

“I killed him,” Bonello said. “I never killed anybody in this war, and
all my life I’ve wanted to kill a sergeant.”

“You killed him on the sit all right,” Piani said. “He wasn’t flying
very fast when you killed him.”

“Never mind. That’s one thing I can always remember. I killed that ——
of a sergeant.”

“What will you say in confession?” Aymo asked.

“I’ll say, ‘Bless me, father, I killed a sergeant.’” They all laughed.

“He’s an anarchist,” Piani said. “He doesn’t go to church.”

“Piani’s an anarchist too,” Bonello said.

“Are you really anarchists?” I asked.

“No, Tenente. We’re socialists. We come from Imola.”

“Haven’t you ever been there?”

“No.”

“By Christ it’s a fine place, Tenente. You come there after the war and
we’ll show you something.”

“Are you all socialists?”

“Everybody.”

“Is it a fine town?”

“Wonderful. You never saw a town like that.”

“How did you get to be socialists?”

“We’re all socialists. Everybody is a socialist. We’ve always been
socialists.”

“You come, Tenente. We’ll make you a socialist too.”

Ahead the road turned off to the left and there was a little hill and,
beyond a stone wall, an apple orchard. As the road went uphill they
ceased talking. We walked along together all going fast against time.




                              CHAPTER XXX

Later we were on a road that led to a river. There was a long line of
abandoned trucks and carts on the road leading up to the bridge. No one
was in sight. The river was high and the bridge had been blown up in the
centre; the stone arch was fallen into the river and the brown water was
going over it. We went on up the bank looking for a place to cross. Up
ahead I knew there was a railway bridge and I thought we might be able
to get across there. The path was wet and muddy. We did not see any
troops; only abandoned trucks and stores. Along the river bank there was
nothing and no one but the wet brush and muddy ground. We went up to the
bank and finally we saw the railway bridge.

“What a beautiful bridge,” Aymo said. It was a long plain iron bridge
across what was usually a dry river-bed.

“We better hurry and get across before they blow it up,” I said.

“There’s nobody to blow it up,” Piani said. “They’re all gone.”

“It’s probably mined,” Bonello said. “You cross first, Tenente.”

“Listen to the anarchist,” Aymo said. “Make him go first.”

“I’ll go,” I said. “It won’t be mined to blow up with one man.”

“You see,” Piani said. “That is brains. Why haven’t you brains,
anarchist?”

“If I had brains I wouldn’t be here,” Bonello said.

“That’s pretty good, Tenente,” Aymo said.

“That’s pretty good,” I said. We were close to the bridge now. The sky
had clouded over again and it was raining a little. The bridge looked
long and solid. We climbed up the embankment.

“Come one at a time,” I said and started across the bridge. I watched
the ties and the rails for any tripwires or signs of explosive but I saw
nothing. Down below the gaps in the ties the river ran muddy and fast.
Ahead across the wet countryside I could see Udine in the rain. Across
the bridge I looked back. Just up the river was another bridge. As I
watched, a yellow mud-colored motor car crossed it. The sides of the
bridge were high and the body of the car, once on, was out of sight. But
I saw the heads of the driver, the man on the seat with him, and the two
men on the rear seat. They all wore German helmets. Then the car was
over the bridge and out of sight behind the trees and the abandoned
vehicles on the road. I waved to Aymo who was crossing and to the others
to come on. I climbed down and crouched beside the railway embankment.
Aymo came down with me.

“Did you see the car?” I asked.

“No. We were watching you.”

“A German staff car crossed on the upper bridge.”

“A staff car?”

“Yes.”

“Holy Mary.”

The others came and we all crouched in the mud behind the embankment,
looking across the rails at the bridge, the line of trees, the ditch and
the road.

“Do you think we’re cut off then, Tenente?”

“I don’t know. All I know is a German staff car went along that road.”

“You don’t feel funny, Tenente? You haven’t got strange feelings in the
head?”

“Don’t be funny, Bonello.”

“What about a drink?” Piani asked. “If we’re cut off we might as well
have a drink.” He unhooked his canteen and uncorked it.

“Look! Look!” Aymo said and pointed toward the road. Along the top of
the stone bridge we could see German helmets moving. They were bent
forward and moved smoothly, almost supernaturally, along. As they came
off the bridge we saw them. They were bicycle troops. I saw the faces of
the first two. They were ruddy and healthy-looking. Their helmets came
low down over their foreheads and the side of their faces. Their
carbines were clipped to the frame of the bicycles. Stick bombs hung
handle down from their belts. Their helmets and their gray uniforms were
wet and they rode easily, looking ahead and to both sides. There were
two—then four in line, then two, then almost a dozen; then another
dozen—then one alone. They did not talk but we could not have heard
them because of the noise from the river. They were gone out of sight up
the road.

“Holy Mary,” Aymo said.

“They were Germans,” Piani said. “Those weren’t Austrians.”

“Why isn’t there somebody here to stop them?” I said. “Why haven’t they
blown the bridge up? Why aren’t there machine-guns along this
embankment?”

“You tell us, Tenente,” Bonello said.

I was very angry.

“The whole bloody thing is crazy. Down below they blow up a little
bridge. Here they leave a bridge on the main road. Where is everybody?
Don’t they try and stop them at all?”

“You tell us, Tenente,” Bonello said. I shut up. It was none of my
business; all I had to do was to get to Pordenone with three ambulances.
I had failed at that. All I had to do now was get to Pordenone. I
probably could not even get to Udine. The hell I couldn’t. The thing to
do was to be calm and not get shot or captured.

“Didn’t you have a canteen open?” I asked Piani. He handed it to me. I
took a long drink. “We might as well start,” I said. “There’s no hurry
though. Do you want to eat something?”

“This is no place to stay,” Bonello said.

“All right. We’ll start.”

“Should we keep on this side—out of sight?”

“We’ll be better off on top. They may come along this bridge too. We
don’t want them on top of us before we see them.”

We walked along the railroad track. On both sides of us stretched the
wet plain. Ahead across the plain was the hill of Udine. The roofs fell
away from the castle on the hill. We could see the campanile and the
clock-tower. There were many mulberry trees in the fields. Ahead I saw a
place where the rails were torn up. The ties had been dug out too and
thrown down the embankment.

“Down! down!” Aymo said. We dropped down beside the embankment. There
was another group of bicyclists passing along the road. I looked over
the edge and saw them go on.

“They saw us but they went on,” Aymo said.

“We’ll get killed up there, Tenente,” Bonello said.

“They don’t want us,” I said. “They’re after something else. We’re in
more danger if they should come on us suddenly.”

“I’d rather walk here out of sight,” Bonello said.

“All right. We’ll walk along the tracks.”

“Do you think we can get through?” Aymo asked.

“Sure. There aren’t very many of them yet. We’ll go through in the
dark.”

“What was that staff car doing?”

“Christ knows,” I said. We kept on up the tracks. Bonello tired of
walking in the mud of the embankment and came up with the rest of us.
The railway moved south away from the highway now and we could not see
what passed along the road. A short bridge over a canal was blown up but
we climbed across on what was left of the span. We heard firing ahead of
us.

We came up on the railway beyond the canal. It went on straight toward
the town across the low fields. We could see the line of the other
railway ahead of us. To the north was the main road where we had seen
the cyclists; to the south there was a small branch-road across the
fields with thick trees on each side. I thought we had better cut to the
south and work around the town that way and across country toward
Campoformio and the main road to the Tagliamento. We could avoid the
main line of the retreat by keeping to the secondary roads beyond Udine.
I knew there were plenty of side-roads across the plain. I started down
the embankment.

“Come on,” I said. We would make for the side-road and work to the south
of the town. We all started down the embankment. A shot was fired at us
from the side-road. The bullet went into the mud of the embankment.

“Go on back,” I shouted. I started up the embankment, slipping in the
mud. The drivers were ahead of me. I went up the embankment as fast as I
could go. Two more shots came from the thick brush and Aymo, as he was
crossing the tracks, lurched, tripped and fell face down. We pulled him
down on the other side and turned him over. “His head ought to be
uphill,” I said. Piani moved him around. He lay in the mud on the side
of the embankment, his feet pointing downhill, breathing blood
irregularly. The three of us squatted over him in the rain. He was hit
low in the back of the neck and the bullet had ranged upward and come
out under the right eye. He died while I was stopping up the two holes.
Piani laid his head down, wiped at his face, with a piece of the
emergency dressing, then let it alone.

“The ——,” he said.

“They weren’t Germans,” I said. “There can’t be any Germans over there.”

“Italians,” Piani said, using the word as an epithet, “Italiani!”
Bonello said nothing. He was sitting beside Aymo, not looking at him.
Piani picked up Aymo’s cap where it had rolled down the embankment and
put it over his face. He took out his canteen.

“Do you want a drink?” Piani handed Bonello the canteen.

“No,” Bonello said. He turned to me. “That might have happened to us any
time on the railway tracks.”

“No,” I said. “It was because we started across the field.”

Bonello shook his head. “Aymo’s dead,” he said. “Who’s dead next,
Tenente? Where do we go now?”

“Those were Italians that shot,” I said. “They weren’t Germans.”

“I suppose if they were Germans they’d have killed all of us,” Bonello
said.

“We are in more danger from Italians than Germans,” I said. “The rear
guard are afraid of everything. The Germans know what they’re after.”

“You reason it out, Tenente,” Bonello said.

“Where do we go now?” Piani asked.

“We better lie up some place till it’s dark. If we could get south we’d
be all right.”

“They’d have to shoot us all to prove they were right the first time,”
Bonello said. “I’m not going to try them.”

“We’ll find a place to lie up as near to Udine as we can get and then go
through when it’s dark.”

“Let’s go then,” Bonello said. We went down the north side of the
embankment. I looked back. Aymo lay in the mud with the angle of the
embankment. He was quite small and his arms were by his side, his
puttee-wrapped legs and muddy boots together, his cap over his face. He
looked very dead. It was raining. I had liked him as well as any one I
ever knew. I had his papers in my pocket and would write to his family.
Ahead across the fields was a farmhouse. There were trees around it and
the farm buildings were built against the house. There was a balcony
along the second floor held up by columns.

“We better keep a little way apart,” I said. “I’ll go ahead.” I started
toward the farmhouse. There was a path across the field.

Crossing the field, I did not know but that some one would fire on us
from the trees near the farmhouse or from the farmhouse itself. I walked
toward it, seeing it very clearly. The balcony of the second floor
merged into the barn and there was hay coming out between the columns.
The courtyard was of stone blocks and all the trees were dripping with
the rain. There was a big empty two-wheeled cart, the shafts tipped high
up in the rain. I came to the courtyard, crossed it, and stood under the
shelter of the balcony. The door of the house was open and I went in.
Bonello and Piani came in after me. It was dark inside. I went back to
the kitchen. There were ashes of a fire on the big open hearth. The pots
hung over the ashes, but they were empty. I looked around but I could
not find anything to eat.

“We ought to lie up in the barn,” I said. “Do you think you could find
anything to eat, Piani, and bring it up there?”

“I’ll look,” Piani said.

“I’ll look too,” Bonello said.

“All right,” I said. “I’ll go up and look at the barn.” I found a stone
stairway that went up from the stable underneath. The stable smelt dry
and pleasant in the rain. The cattle were all gone, probably driven off
when they left. The barn was half full of hay. There were two windows in
the roof, one was blocked with boards, the other was a narrow dormer
window on the north side. There was a chute so that hay might be pitched
down to the cattle. Beams crossed the opening down into the main floor
where the hay-carts drove in when the hay was hauled in to be pitched
up. I heard the rain on the roof and smelled the hay and, when I went
down, the clean smell of dried dung in the stable. We could pry a board
loose and see out of the south window down into the courtyard. The other
window looked out on the field toward the north. We could get out of
either window onto the roof and down, or go down the hay chute if the
stairs were impractical. It was a big barn and we could hide in the hay
if we heard any one. It seemed like a good place. I was sure we could
have gotten through to the south if they had not fired on us. It was
impossible that there were Germans there. They were coming from the
north and down the road from Cividale. They could not have come through
from the south. The Italians were even more dangerous. They were
frightened and firing on anything they saw. Last night on the retreat we
had heard that there had been many Germans in Italian uniforms mixing
with the retreat in the north. I did not believe it. That was one of
those things you always heard in the war. It was one of the things the
enemy always did to you. You did not know any one who went over in
German uniform to confuse them. Maybe they did but it sounded difficult.
I did not believe the Germans did it. I did not believe they had to.
There was no need to confuse our retreat. The size of the army and the
fewness of the roads did that. Nobody gave any orders, let alone
Germans. Still, they would shoot us for Germans. They shot Aymo. The hay
smelled good and lying in a barn in the hay took away all the years in
between. We had lain in hay and talked and shot sparrows with an
air-rifle when they perched in the triangle cut high up in the wall of
the barn. The barn was gone now and one year they had cut the hemlock
woods and there were only stumps, dried tree-tops, branches and fireweed
where the woods had been. You could not go back. If you did not go
forward what happened? You never got back to Milan. And if you got back
to Milan what happened? I listened to the firing to the north toward
Udine. I could hear machine-gun firing. There was no shelling. That was
something. They must have gotten some troops along the road. I looked
down in the half-light of the hay-barn and saw Piani standing on the
hauling floor. He had a long sausage, a jar of something and two bottles
of wine under his arm.

“Come up,” I said. “There is the ladder.” Then I realized that I should
help him with the things and went down. I was vague in the head from
lying in the hay. I had been nearly asleep.

“Where’s Bonello?” I asked.

“I’ll tell you,” Piani said. We went up the ladder. Up on the hay we set
the things down. Piani took out his knife with the corkscrew and drew
the cork on a wine bottle.

“They have sealing-wax on it,” he said. “It must be good.” He smiled.

“Where’s Bonello?” I asked.

Piani looked at me.

“He went away, Tenente,” he said. “He wanted to be a prisoner.”

I did not say anything.

“He was afraid we would get killed.”

I held the bottle of wine and did not say anything.

“You see we don’t believe in the war anyway, Tenente.”

“Why didn’t you go?” I asked.

“I did not want to leave you.”

“Where did he go?”

“I don’t know, Tenente. He went away.”

“All right,” I said. “Will you cut the sausage?”

Piani looked at me in the half-light.

“I cut it while we were talking,” he said. We sat in the hay and ate the
sausage and drank the wine. It must have been wine they had saved for a
wedding. It was so old that it was losing its color.

“You look out of this window, Luigi,” I said. “I’ll go look out the
other window.”

We had each been drinking out of one of the bottles and I took my bottle
with me and went over and lay flat on the hay and looked out the narrow
window at the wet country. I do not know what I expected to see but I
did not see anything except the fields and the bare mulberry trees and
the rain falling. I drank the wine and it did not make me feel good.
They had kept it too long and it had gone to pieces and lost its quality
and color. I watched it get dark outside; the darkness came very
quickly. It would be a black night with the rain. When it was dark there
was no use watching any more, so I went over to Piani. He was lying
asleep and I did not wake him but sat down beside him for a while. He
was a big man and he slept heavily. After a while I woke him and we
started.

That was a very strange night. I do not know what I had expected, death
perhaps and shooting in the dark and running, but nothing happened. We
waited, lying flat beyond the ditch along the main road while a German
battalion passed, then when they were gone we crossed the road and went
on to the north. We were very close to Germans twice in the rain but
they did not see us. We got past the town to the north without seeing
any Italians, then after a while came on the main channels of the
retreat and walked all night toward the Tagliamento. I had not realized
how gigantic the retreat was. The whole country was moving, as well as
the army. We walked all night, making better time than the vehicles. My
leg ached and I was tired but we made good time. It seemed so silly for
Bonello to have decided to be taken prisoner. There was no danger. We
had walked through two armies without incident. If Aymo had not been
killed there would never have seemed to be any danger. No one had
bothered us when we were in plain sight along the railway. The killing
came suddenly and unreasonably. I wondered where Bonello was.

“How do you feel, Tenente?” Piani asked. We were going along the side of
a road crowded with vehicles and troops.

“Fine.”

“I’m tired of this walking.”

“Well, all we have to do is walk now. We don’t have to worry.”

“Bonello was a fool.”

“He was a fool all right.”

“What will you do about him, Tenente?”

“I don’t know.”

“Can’t you just put him down as taken prisoner?”

“I don’t know.”

“You see if the war went on they would make bad trouble for his family.”

“The war won’t go on,” a soldier said. “We’re going home. The war is
over.”

“Everybody’s going home.”

“We’re all going home.”

“Come on, Tenente,” Piani said. He wanted to get past them.

“Tenente? Who’s a Tenente? _A basso gli ufficiali!_ Down with the
officers!”

Piani took me by the arm. “I better call you by your name,” he said.
“They might try and make trouble. They’ve shot some officers.” We worked
up past them.

“I won’t make a report that will make trouble for his family.” I went on
with our conversation.

“If the war is over it makes no difference,” Piani said. “But I don’t
believe it’s over. It’s too good that it should be over.”

“We’ll know pretty soon,” I said.

“I don’t believe it’s over. They all think it’s over but I don’t believe
it.”

“_Viva la Pace!_” a soldier shouted out. “We’re going home!”

“It would be fine if we all went home,” Piani said. “Wouldn’t you like
to go home?”

“Yes.”

“We’ll never go. I don’t think it’s over.”

“_Andiamo a casa!_” a soldier shouted.

“They throw away their rifles,” Piani said. “They take them off and drop
them down while they’re marching. Then they shout.”

“They ought to keep their rifles.”

“They think if they throw away their rifles they can’t make them fight.”

In the dark and the rain, making our way along the side of the road I
could see that many of the troops still had their rifles. They stuck up
above the capes.

“What brigade are you?” an officer called out.

“_Brigata di Pace_,” some one shouted. “Peace Brigade!” The officer said
nothing.

“What does he say? What does the officer say?”

“Down with the officer. _Viva la Pace!_”

“Come on,” Piani said. We passed two British ambulances, abandoned in
the block of vehicles.

“They’re from Gorizia,” Piani said. “I know the cars.”

“They got further than we did.”

“They started earlier.”

“I wonder where the drivers are?”

“Up ahead probably.”

“The Germans have stopped outside Udine,” I said. “These people will all
get across the river.”

“Yes,” Piani said. “That’s why I think the war will go on.”

“The Germans could come on,” I said. “I wonder why they don’t come on.”

“I don’t know. I don’t know anything about this kind of war.”

“They have to wait for their transport I suppose.”

“I don’t know,” Piani said. Alone he was much gentler. When he was with
the others he was a very rough talker.

“Are you married, Luigi?”

“You know I am married.”

“Is that why you did not want to be a prisoner?”

“That is one reason. Are you married, Tenente?”

“No.”

“Neither is Bonello.”

“You can’t tell anything by a man’s being married. But I should think a
married man would want to get back to his wife,” I said. I would be glad
to talk about wives.

“Yes.”

“How are your feet?”

“They’re sore enough.”

Before daylight we reached the bank of the Tagliamento and followed down
along the flooded river to the bridge where all the traffic was
crossing.

“They ought to be able to hold at this river,” Piani said. In the dark
the flood looked high. The water swirled and it was wide. The wooden
bridge was nearly three-quarters of a mile across, and the river, that
usually ran in narrow channels in the wide stony bed far below the
bridge, was close under the wooden planking. We went along the bank and
then worked our way into the crowd that were crossing the bridge.
Crossing slowly in the rain a few feet above the flood, pressed tight in
the crowd, the box of an artillery caisson just ahead, I looked over the
side and watched the river. Now that we could not go our own pace I felt
very tired. There was no exhilaration in crossing the bridge. I wondered
what it would be like if a plane bombed it in the daytime.

“Piani,” I said.

“Here I am, Tenente.” He was a little ahead in the jam. No one was
talking. They were all trying to get across as soon as they could:
thinking only of that. We were almost across. At the far end of the
bridge there were officers and carabinieri standing on both sides
flashing lights. I saw them silhouetted against the sky-line. As we came
close to them I saw one of the officers point to a man in the column. A
carabiniere went in after him and came out holding the man by the arm.
He took him away from the road. We came almost opposite them. The
officers were scrutinizing every one in the column, sometimes speaking
to each other, going forward to flash a light in some one’s face. They
took some one else out just before we came opposite. I saw the man. He
was a lieutenant-colonel. I saw the stars in the box on his sleeve as
they flashed a light on him. His hair was gray and he was short and fat.
The carabiniere pulled him in behind the line of officers. As we came
opposite I saw one or two of them look at me. Then one pointed at me and
spoke to a carabiniere. I saw the carabiniere start for me, come through
the edge of the column toward me, then felt him take me by the collar.

“What’s the matter with you?” I said and hit him in the face. I saw his
face under the hat, upturned mustaches and blood coming down his cheek.
Another one dove in toward us.

“What’s the matter with you?” I said. He did not answer. He was watching
a chance to grab me. I put my arm behind me to loosen my pistol.

“Don’t you know you can’t touch an officer?”

The other one grabbed me from behind and pulled my arm up so that it
twisted in the socket. I turned with him and the other one grabbed me
around the neck. I kicked his shins and got my left knee into his groin.

“Shoot him if he resists,” I heard some one say.

“What’s the meaning of this?” I tried to shout but my voice was not very
loud. They had me at the side of the road now.

“Shoot him if he resists,” an officer said. “Take him over back.”

“Who are you?”

“You’ll find out.”

“Who are you?”

“Battle police,” another officer said.

“Why don’t you ask me to step over instead of having one of these
airplanes grab me?”

They did not answer. They did not have to answer. They were battle
police.

“Take him back there with the others,” the first officer said. “You see.
He speaks Italian with an accent.”

“So do you, you ——,” I said.

“Take him back with the others,” the first officer said. They took me
down behind the line of officers below the road toward a group of people
in a field by the river bank. As we walked toward them shots were fired.
I saw flashes of the rifles and heard the reports. We came up to the
group. There were four officers standing together, with a man in front
of them with a carabiniere on each side of him. A group of men were
standing guarded by carabinieri. Four other carabinieri stood near the
questioning officers, leaning on their carbines. They were wide-hatted
carabinieri. The two who had me shoved me in with the group waiting to
be questioned. I looked at the man the officers were questioning. He was
the fat gray-haired little lieutenant-colonel they had taken out of the
column. The questioners had all the efficiency, coldness and command of
themselves of Italians who are firing and are not being fired on.

“Your brigade?”

He told them.

“Regiment?”

He told them.

“Why are you not with your regiment?”

He told them.

“Do you not know that an officer should be with his troops?”

He did.

That was all. Another officer spoke.

“It is you and such as you that have let the barbarians onto the sacred
soil of the fatherland.”

“I beg your pardon,” said the lieutenant-colonel.

“It is because of treachery such as yours that we have lost the fruits
of victory.”

“Have you ever been in a retreat?” the lieutenant-colonel asked.

“Italy should never retreat.”

We stood there in the rain and listened to this. We were facing the
officers and the prisoner stood in front and a little to one side of us.

“If you are going to shoot me,” the lieutenant-colonel said, “please
shoot me at once without further questioning. The questioning is
stupid.” He made the sign of the cross. The officers spoke together. One
wrote something on a pad of paper.

“Abandoned his troops, ordered to be shot,” he said.

Two carabinieri took the lieutenant-colonel to the river bank. He walked
in the rain, an old man with his hat off, a carabiniere on either side.
I did not watch them shoot him but I heard the shots. They were
questioning some one else. This officer too was separated from his
troops. He was not allowed to make an explanation. He cried when they
read the sentence from the pad of paper, and they were questioning
another when they shot him. They made a point of being intent on
questioning the next man while the man who had been questioned before
was being shot. In this way there was obviously nothing they could do
about it. I did not know whether I should wait to be questioned or make
a break now. I was obviously a German in Italian uniform. I saw how
their minds worked; if they had minds and if they worked. They were all
young men and they were saving their country. The second army was being
re-formed beyond the Tagliamento. They were executing officers of the
rank of major and above who were separated from their troops. They were
also dealing summarily with German agitators in Italian uniform. They
wore steel helmets. Only two of us had steel helmets. Some of the
carabinieri had them. The other carabinieri wore the wide hat. Airplanes
we called them. We stood in the rain and were taken out one at a time to
be questioned and shot. So far they had shot every one they had
questioned. The questioners had that beautiful detachment and devotion
to stern justice of men dealing in death without being in any danger of
it. They were questioning a full colonel of a line regiment. Three more
officers had just been put in with us.

“Where was his regiment?”

I looked at the carabinieri. They were looking at the newcomers. The
others were looking at the colonel. I ducked down, pushed between two
men, and ran for the river, my head down. I tripped at the edge and went
in with a splash. The water was very cold and I stayed under as long as
I could. I could feel the current swirl me and I stayed under until I
thought I could never come up. The minute I came up I took a breath and
went down again. It was easy to stay under with so much clothing and my
boots. When I came up the second time I saw a piece of timber ahead of
me and reached it and held on with one hand. I kept my head behind it
and did not even look over it. I did not want to see the bank. There
were shots when I ran and shots when I came up the first time. I heard
them when I was almost above water. There were no shots now. The piece
of timber swung in the current and I held it with one hand. I looked at
the bank. It seemed to be going by very fast. There was much wood in the
stream. The water was very cold. We passed the brush of an island above
the water. I held onto the timber with both hands and let it take me
along. The shore was out of sight now.




                              CHAPTER XXXI

You do not know how long you are in a river when the current moves
swiftly. It seems a long time and it may be very short. The water was
cold and in flood and many things passed that had been floated off the
banks when the river rose. I was lucky to have a heavy timber to hold on
to, and I lay in the icy water with my chin on the wood, holding as
easily as I could with both hands. I was afraid of cramps and I hoped we
would move toward the shore. We went down the river in a long curve. It
was beginning to be light enough so I could see the bushes along the
shore-line. There was a brush island ahead and the current moved toward
the shore. I wondered if I should take off my boots and clothes and try
to swim ashore, but decided not to. I had never thought of anything but
that I would reach the shore some way, and I would be in a bad position
if I landed barefoot. I had to get to Mestre some way.

I watched the shore come close, then swing away, then come closer again.
We were floating more slowly. The shore was very close now. I could see
twigs on the willow bush. The timber swung slowly so that the bank was
behind me and I knew we were in an eddy. We went slowly around. As I saw
the bank again, very close now, I tried holding with one arm and kicking
and swimming the timber toward the bank with the other, but I did not
bring it any closer. I was afraid we would move out of the eddy and,
holding with one hand, I drew up my feet so they were against the side
of the timber and shoved hard toward the bank. I could see the brush,
but even with my momentum and swimming as hard as I could, the current
was taking me away. I thought then I would drown because of my boots,
but I thrashed and fought through the water, and when I looked up the
bank was coming toward me, and I kept thrashing and swimming in a
heavy-footed panic until I reached it. I hung to the willow branch and
did not have strength to pull myself up but I knew I would not drown
now. It had never occurred to me on the timber that I might drown. I
felt hollow and sick in my stomach and chest from the effort, and I held
to the branches and waited. When the sick feeling was gone I pulled into
the willow bushes and rested again, my arms around some brush, holding
tight with my hands to the branches. Then I crawled out, pushed on
through the willows and onto the bank. It was half-daylight and I saw no
one. I lay flat on the bank and heard the river and the rain.

After a while I got up and started along the bank. I knew there was no
bridge across the river until Latisana. I thought I might be opposite
San Vito. I began to think out what I should do. Ahead there was a ditch
running into the river. I went toward it. So far I had seen no one and I
sat down by some bushes along the bank of the ditch and took off my
shoes and emptied them of water. I took off my coat, took my wallet with
my papers and my money all wet in it out of the inside pocket and then
wrung the coat out. I took off my trousers and wrung them too, then my
shirt and underclothing. I slapped and rubbed myself and then dressed
again. I had lost my cap.

Before I put on my coat I cut the cloth stars off my sleeves and put
them in the inside pocket with my money. My money was wet but was all
right. I counted it. There were three thousand and some lire. My clothes
felt wet and clammy and I slapped my arms to keep the circulation going.
I had woven underwear and I did not think I would catch cold if I kept
moving. They had taken my pistol at the road and I put the holster under
my coat. I had no cape and it was cold in the rain. I started up the
bank of the canal. It was daylight and the country was wet, low and
dismal looking. The fields were bare and wet; a long way away I could
see a campanile rising out of the plain. I came up onto a road. Ahead I
saw some troops coming down the road. I limped along the side of the
road and they passed me and paid no attention to me. They were a
machine-gun detachment going up toward the river. I went on down the
road.

That day I crossed the Venetian plain. It is a low level country and
under the rain it is even flatter. Toward the sea there are salt marshes
and very few roads. The roads all go along the river mouths to the sea
and to cross the country you must go along the paths beside the canals.
I was working across the country from the north to the south and had
crossed two railway lines and many roads and finally I came out at the
end of a path onto a railway line where it ran beside a marsh. It was
the main line from Venice to Trieste, with a high solid embankment, a
solid roadbed and double track. Down the tracks a way was a flag-station
and I could see soldiers on guard. Up the line there was a bridge over a
stream that flowed into the marsh. I could see a guard too at the
bridge. Crossing the fields to the north I had seen a train pass on this
railroad, visible a long way across the flat plain, and I thought a
train might come from Portogruaro. I watched the guards and lay down on
the embankment so that I could see both ways along the track. The guard
at the bridge walked a way up the line toward where I lay, then turned
and went back toward the bridge. I lay, and was hungry, and waited for
the train. The one I had seen was so long that the engine moved it very
slowly and I was sure I could get aboard it. After I had almost given up
hoping for one I saw a train coming. The engine, coming straight on,
grew larger slowly. I looked at the guard at the bridge. He was walking
on the near side of the bridge but on the other side of the tracks. That
would put him out of sight when the train passed. I watched the engine
come nearer. It was working hard. I could see there were many cars. I
knew there would be guards on the train, and I tried to see where they
were, but, keeping out of sight, I could not. The engine was almost to
where I was lying. When it came opposite, working and puffing even on
the level, and I saw the engineer pass, I stood up and stepped up close
to the passing cars. If the guards were watching I was a less suspicious
object standing beside the track. Several closed freight-cars passed.
Then I saw a low open car of the sort they call gondolas coming, covered
with canvas. I stood until it had almost passed, then jumped and caught
the rear hand-rods and pulled up. I crawled down between the gondola and
the shelter of the high freight-car behind. I did not think any one had
seen me. I was holding to the hand-rods and crouching low, my feet on
the coupling. We were almost opposite the bridge. I remembered the
guard. As we passed him he looked at me. He was a boy and his helmet was
too big for him. I stared at him contemptuously and he looked away. He
thought I had something to do with the train.

We were past. I saw him still looking uncomfortable, watching the other
cars pass and I stooped to see how the canvas was fastened. It had
grummets and was laced down at the edge with cord. I took out my knife,
cut the cord and put my arm under. There were hard bulges under the
canvas that tightened in the rain. I looked up and ahead. There was a
guard on the freight-car ahead but he was looking forward. I let go of
the hand-rails and ducked under the canvas. My forehead hit something
that gave me a violent bump and I felt blood on my face but I crawled on
in and lay flat. Then I turned around and fastened down the canvas.

I was in under the canvas with guns. They smelled cleanly of oil and
grease. I lay and listened to the rain on the canvas and the clicking of
the car over the rails. There was a little light came through and I lay
and looked at the guns. They had their canvas jackets on. I thought they
must have been sent ahead from the third army. The bump on my forehead
was swollen and I stopped the bleeding by lying still and letting it
coagulate, then picked away the dried blood except over the cut. It was
nothing. I had no handkerchief, but feeling with my fingers I washed
away where the dried blood had been, with rain-water that dripped from
the canvas, and wiped it clean with the sleeve of my coat. I did not
want to look conspicuous. I knew I would have to get out before they got
to Mestre because they would be taking care of these guns. They had no
guns to lose or forget about. I was terrifically hungry.




                             CHAPTER XXXII

Lying on the floor of the flat-car with the guns beside me under the
canvas I was wet, cold and very hungry. Finally I rolled over and lay
flat on my stomach with my head on my arms. My knee was stiff, but it
had been very satisfactory. Valentini had done a fine job. I had done
half the retreat on foot and swum part of the Tagliamento with his knee.
It was his knee all right. The other knee was mine. Doctors did things
to you and then it was not your body any more. The head was mine, and
the inside of the belly. It was very hungry in there. I could feel it
turn over on itself. The head was mine, but not to use, not to think
with; only to remember and not too much remember.

I could remember Catherine but I knew I would get crazy if I thought
about her when I was not sure yet I would see her, so I would not think
about her, only about her a little, only about her with the car going
slowly and clickingly, and some light through the canvas and my lying
with Catherine on the floor of the car. Hard as the floor of the car to
lie not thinking only feeling, having been away too long, the clothes
wet and the floor moving only a little each time and lonesome inside and
alone with wet clothing and hard floor for a wife.

You did not love the floor of a flat-car nor guns with canvas jackets
and the smell of vaselined metal or a canvas that rain leaked through,
although it is very fine under a canvas and pleasant with guns; but you
loved some one else whom now you knew was not even to be pretended
there; you seeing now very clearly and coldly—not so coldly as clearly
and emptily. You saw emptily, lying on your stomach, having been present
when one army moved back and another came forward. You had lost your
cars and your men as a floorwalker loses the stock of his department in
a fire. There was, however, no insurance. You were out of it now. You
had no more obligation. If they shot floorwalkers after a fire in the
department store because they spoke with an accent they had always had,
then certainly the floorwalkers would not be expected to return when the
store opened again for business. They might seek other employment; if
there was any other employment and the police did not get them.

Anger was washed away in the river along with any obligation. Although
that ceased when the carabiniere put his hands on my collar. I would
like to have had the uniform off although I did not care much about the
outward forms. I had taken off the stars, but that was for convenience.
It was no point of honor. I was not against them. I was through. I
wished them all the luck. There were the good ones, and the brave ones,
and the calm ones and the sensible ones, and they deserved it. But it
was not my show any more and I wished this bloody train would get to
Mestre and I would eat and stop thinking. I would have to stop.

Piani would tell them they had shot me. They went through the pockets
and took the papers of the people they shot. They would not have my
papers. They might call me drowned. I wondered what they would hear in
the States. Dead from wounds and other causes. Good Christ I was hungry.
I wondered what had become of the priest at the mess. And Rinaldi. He
was probably at Pordenone. If they had not gone further back. Well, I
would never see him now. I would never see any of them now. That life
was over. I did not think he had syphilis. It was not a serious disease
anyway if you took it in time, they said. But he would worry. I would
worry too if I had it. Any one would worry.

I was not made to think. I was made to eat. My God, yes. Eat and drink
and sleep with Catherine. To-night maybe. No that was impossible. But
to-morrow night, and a good meal and sheets and never going away again
except together. Probably have to go damned quickly. She would go. I
knew she would go. When would we go? That was something to think about.
It was getting dark. I lay and thought where we would go. There were
many places.




                                BOOK IV




                             CHAPTER XXXIII

I dropped off the train in Milan as it slowed to come into the station
early in the morning before it was light. I crossed the track and came
out between some buildings and down onto the street. A wine shop was
open and I went in for some coffee. It smelled of early morning, of
swept dust, spoons in coffee-glasses and the wet circles left by
wine-glasses. The proprietor was behind the bar. Two soldiers sat at a
table. I stood at the bar and drank a glass of coffee and ate a piece of
bread. The coffee was gray with milk, and I skimmed the milk scum off
the top with a piece of bread. The proprietor looked at me.

“You want a glass of grappa?”

“No thanks.”

“On me,” he said and poured a small glass and pushed it toward me.
“What’s happening at the front?”

“I would not know.”

“They are drunk,” he said, moving his hand toward the two soldiers. I
could believe him. They looked drunk.

“Tell me,” he said, “what is happening at the front?”

“I would not know about the front.”

“I saw you come down the wall. You came off the train.”

“There is a big retreat.”

“I read the papers. What happens? Is it over?”

“I don’t think so.”

He filled the glass with grappa from a short bottle. “If you are in
trouble,” he said, “I can keep you.”

“I am not in trouble.”

“If you are in trouble stay here with me.”

“Where does one stay?”

“In the building. Many stay here. Any who are in trouble stay here.”

“Are many in trouble?”

“It depends on the trouble. You are a South American?”

“No.”

“Speak Spanish?”

“A little.”

He wiped off the bar.

“It is hard now to leave the country but in no way impossible.”

“I have no wish to leave.”

“You can stay here as long as you want. You will see what sort of man I
am.”

“I have to go this morning but I will remember the address to return.”

He shook his head. “You won’t come back if you talk like that. I thought
you were in real trouble.”

“I am in no trouble. But I value the address of a friend.”

I put a ten-lira note on the bar to pay for the coffee.

“Have a grappa with me,” I said.

“It is not necessary.”

“Have one.”

He poured the two glasses.

“Remember,” he said. “Come here. Do not let other people take you in.
Here you are all right.”

“I am sure.”

“You are sure?”

“Yes.”

He was serious. “Then let me tell you one thing. Do not go about with
that coat.”

“Why?”

“On the sleeves it shows very plainly where the stars have been cut
away. The cloth is a different color.”

I did not say anything.

“If you have no papers I can give you papers.”

“What papers?”

“Leave-papers.”

“I have no need for papers. I have papers.”

“All right,” he said. “But if you need papers I can get what you wish.”

“How much are such papers?”

“It depends on what they are. The price is reasonable.”

“I don’t need any now.”

He shrugged his shoulders.

“I’m all right,” I said.

When I went out he said, “Don’t forget that I am your friend.”

“No.”

“I will see you again,” he said.

“Good,” I said.

Outside I kept away from the station, where there were military police,
and picked up a cab at the edge of the little park. I gave the driver
the address of the hospital. At the hospital I went to the porter’s
lodge. His wife embraced me. He shook my hand.

“You are back. You are safe.”

“Yes.”

“Have you had breakfast?”

“Yes.”

“How are you, Tenente? How are you?” the wife asked.

“Fine.”

“Won’t you have breakfast with us?”

“No, thank you. Tell me is Miss Barkley here at the hospital now?”

“Miss Barkley?”

“The English lady nurse.”

“His girl,” the wife said. She patted my arm and smiled.

“No,” the porter said. “She is away.”

My heart went down. “You are sure? I mean the tall blonde English young
lady.”

“I am sure. She is gone to Stresa.”

“When did she go?”

“She went two days ago with the other lady English.”

“Good,” I said. “I wish you to do something for me. Do not tell any one
you have seen me. It is very important.”

“I won’t tell any one,” the porter said. I gave him a ten-lira note. He
pushed it away.

“I promise you I will tell no one,” he said. “I don’t want any money.”

“What can we do for you, Signor Tenente?” his wife asked.

“Only that,” I said.

“We are dumb,” the porter said. “You will let me know anything I can
do?”

“Yes,” I said. “Good-by. I will see you again.”

They stood in the door, looking after me.

I got into the cab and gave the driver the address of Simmons, one of
the men I knew who was studying singing.

Simmons lived a long way out in the town toward the Porta Magenta. He
was still in bed and sleepy when I went to see him.

“You get up awfully early, Henry,” he said.

“I came in on the early train.”

“What’s all this retreat? Were you at the front? Will you have a
cigarette? They’re in that box on the table.” It was a big room with a
bed beside the wall, a piano over on the far side and a dresser and
table. I sat on a chair by the bed. Simmons sat propped up by the
pillows and smoked.

“I’m in a jam, Sim,” I said.

“So am I,” he said. “I’m always in a jam. Won’t you smoke?”

“No,” I said. “What’s the procedure in going to Switzerland?”

“For you? The Italians wouldn’t let you out of the country.”

“Yes. I know that. But the Swiss. What will they do?”

“They intern you.”

“I know. But what’s the mechanics of it?”

“Nothing. It’s very simple. You can go anywhere. I think you just have
to report or something. Why? Are you fleeing the police?”

“Nothing definite yet.”

“Don’t tell me if you don’t want. But it would be interesting to hear.
Nothing happens here. I was a great flop at Piacenza.”

“I’m awfully sorry.”

“Oh yes—I went very badly. I sung well too. I’m going to try it again
at the Lyrico here.”

“I’d like to be there.”

“You’re awfully polite. You aren’t in a bad mess, are you?”

“I don’t know.”

“Don’t tell me if you don’t want. How do you happen to be away from the
bloody front?”

“I think I’m through with it.”

“Good boy. I always knew you had sense. Can I help you any way?”

“You’re awfully busy.”

“Not a bit of it, my dear Henry. Not a bit of it. I’d be happy to do
anything.”

“You’re about my size. Would you go out and buy me an outfit of civilian
clothes? I’ve clothes but they’re all at Rome.”

“You did live there, didn’t you? It’s a filthy place. How did you ever
live there?”

“I wanted to be an architect.”

“That’s no place for that. Don’t buy clothes. I’ll give you all the
clothes you want. I’ll fit you out so you’ll be a great success. Go in
that dressing room. There’s a closet. Take anything you want. My dear
fellow, you don’t want to buy clothes.”

“I’d rather buy them, Sim.”

“My dear fellow, it’s easier for me to let you have them than go out and
buy them. Have you got a passport? You won’t get far without a
passport.”

“Yes. I’ve still got my passport.”

“Then get dressed, my dear fellow, and off to old Helvetia.”

“It’s not that simple. I have to go up to Stresa first.”

“Ideal, my dear fellow. You just row a boat across. If I wasn’t trying
to sing, I’d go with you. I’ll go yet.”

“You could take up yodelling.”

“My dear fellow, I’ll take up yodelling yet. I really can sing though.
That’s the strange part.”

“I’ll bet you can sing.”

He lay back in bed smoking a cigarette.

“Don’t bet too much. But I can sing though. It’s damned funny, but I
can. I like to sing. Listen.” He roared into “Africana,” his neck
swelling, the veins standing out. “I can sing,” he said. “Whether they
like it or not.” I looked out of the window. “I’ll go down and let my
cab go.”

“Come back up, my dear fellow, and we’ll have breakfast.” He stepped out
of bed, stood straight, took a deep breath and commenced doing bending
exercises. I went downstairs and paid off the cab.




                             CHAPTER XXXIV

In civilian clothes I felt a masquerader. I had been in uniform a long
time and I missed the feeling of being held by your clothes. The
trousers felt very floppy. I had bought a ticket at Milan for Stresa. I
had also bought a new hat. I could not wear Sim’s hat but his clothes
were fine. They smelled of tobacco and as I sat in the compartment and
looked out the window the new hat felt very new and the clothes very
old. I myself felt as sad as the wet Lombard country that was outside
through the window. There were some aviators in the compartment who did
not think much of me. They avoided looking at me and were very scornful
of a civilian my age. I did not feel insulted. In the old days I would
have insulted them and picked a fight. They got off at Gallarate and I
was glad to be alone. I had the paper but I did not read it because I
did not want to read about the war. I was going to forget the war. I had
made a separate peace. I felt damned lonely and was glad when the train
got to Stresa.

At the station I had expected to see the porters from the hotels but
there was no one. The season had been over a long time and no one met
the train. I got down from the train with my bag, it was Sim’s bag, and
very light to carry, being empty except for two shirts, and stood under
the roof of the station in the rain while the train went on. I found a
man in the station and asked him if he knew what hotels were open. The
Grand-Hôtel & des Isles Borromées was open and several small hotels that
stayed open all the year. I started in the rain for the Isles Borromées
carrying my bag. I saw a carriage coming down the street and signalled
to the driver. It was better to arrive in a carriage. We drove up to the
carriage entrance of the big hotel and the concierge came out with an
umbrella and was very polite.

I took a good room. It was very big and light and looked out on the
lake. The clouds were down over the lake but it would be beautiful with
the sunlight. I was expecting my wife, I said. There was a big double
bed, a _letto matrimoniale_ with a satin coverlet. The hotel was very
luxurious. I went down the long halls, down the wide stairs, through the
rooms to the bar. I knew the barman and sat on a high stool and ate
salted almonds and potato chips. The martini felt cool and clean.

“What are you doing here in _borghese_?” the barman asked after he had
mixed a second martini.

“I am on leave. Convalescing-leave.”

“There is no one here. I don’t know why they keep the hotel open.”

“Have you been fishing?”

“I’ve caught some beautiful pieces. Trolling this time of year you catch
some beautiful pieces.”

“Did you ever get the tobacco I sent?”

“Yes. Didn’t you get my card?”

I laughed. I had not been able to get the tobacco. It was American
pipe-tobacco that he wanted, but my relatives had stopped sending it or
it was being held up. Anyway it never came.

“I’ll get some somewhere,” I said. “Tell me have you seen two English
girls in the town? They came here day before yesterday.”

“They are not at the hotel.”

“They are nurses.”

“I have seen two nurses. Wait a minute, I will find out where they are.”

“One of them is my wife,” I said. “I have come here to meet her.”

“The other is my wife.”

“I am not joking.”

“Pardon my stupid joke,” he said. “I did not understand.” He went away
and was gone quite a little while. I ate olives, salted almonds and
potato chips and looked at myself in civilian clothes in the mirror
behind the bar. The bartender came back. “They are at the little hotel
near the station,” he said.

“How about some sandwiches?”

“I’ll ring for some. You understand there is nothing here, now there are
no people.”

“Isn’t there really any one at all?”

“Yes. There are a few people.”

The sandwiches came and I ate three and drank a couple more martinis. I
had never tasted anything so cool and clean. They made me feel
civilized. I had had too much red wine, bread, cheese, bad coffee and
grappa. I sat on the high stool before the pleasant mahogany, the brass
and the mirrors and did not think at all. The barman asked me some
question.

“Don’t talk about the war,” I said. The war was a long way away. Maybe
there wasn’t any war. There was no war here. Then I realized it was over
for me. But I did not have the feeling that it was really over. I had
the feeling of a boy who thinks of what is happening at a certain hour
at the schoolhouse from which he has played truant.



Catherine and Helen Ferguson were at supper when I came to their hotel.
Standing in the hallway I saw them at table. Catherine’s face was away
from me and I saw the line of her hair and her cheek and her lovely neck
and shoulders. Ferguson was talking. She stopped when I came in.

“My God,” she said.

“Hello,” I said.

“Why it’s you!” Catherine said. Her face lighted up. She looked too
happy to believe it. I kissed her. Catherine blushed and I sat down at
the table.

“You’re a fine mess,” Ferguson said. “What are you doing here? Have you
eaten?”

“No.” The girl who was serving the meal came in and I told her to bring
a plate for me. Catherine looked at me all the time, her eyes happy.

“What are you doing in mufti?” Ferguson asked.

“I’m in the Cabinet.”

“You’re in some mess.”

“Cheer up, Fergy. Cheer up just a little.”

“I’m not cheered by seeing you. I know the mess you’ve gotten this girl
into. You’re no cheerful sight to me.”

Catherine smiled at me and touched me with her foot under the table.

“No one got me in a mess, Fergy. I get in my own messes.”

“I can’t stand him,” Ferguson said. “He’s done nothing but ruin you with
his sneaking Italian tricks. Americans are worse than Italians.”

“The Scotch are such a moral people,” Catherine said.

“I don’t mean that. I mean his Italian sneakiness.”

“Am I sneaky, Fergy?”

“You are. You’re worse than sneaky. You’re like a snake. A snake with an
Italian uniform: with a cape around your neck.”

“I haven’t got an Italian uniform now.”

“That’s just another example of your sneakiness. You had a love affair
all summer and got this girl with child and now I suppose you’ll sneak
off.”

I smiled at Catherine and she smiled at me.

“We’ll both sneak off,” she said.

“You’re two of the same thing,” Ferguson said. “I’m ashamed of you,
Catherine Barkley. You have no shame and no honor and you’re as sneaky
as he is.”

“Don’t, Fergy,” Catherine said and patted her hand. “Don’t denounce me.
You know we like each other.”

“Take your hand away,” Ferguson said. Her face was red. “If you had any
shame it would be different. But you’re God knows how many months gone
with child and you think it’s a joke and are all smiles because your
seducer’s come back. You’ve no shame and no feelings.” She began to cry.
Catherine went over and put her arm around her. As she stood comforting
Ferguson, I could see no change in her figure.

“I don’t care,” Ferguson sobbed. “I think it’s dreadful.”

“There, there, Fergy,” Catherine comforted her. “I’ll be ashamed. Don’t
cry, Fergy. Don’t cry, old Fergy.”

“I’m not crying,” Ferguson sobbed. “I’m not crying. Except for the awful
thing you’ve gotten into.” She looked at me. “I hate you,” she said.
“She can’t make me not hate you. You dirty sneaking American Italian.”
Her eyes and nose were red with crying.

Catherine smiled at me.

“Don’t you smile at him with your arm around me.”

“You’re unreasonable, Fergy.”

“I know it,” Ferguson sobbed. “You mustn’t mind me, either of you. I’m
so upset. I’m not reasonable. I know it. I want you both to be happy.”

“We’re happy,” Catherine said. “You’re a sweet Fergy.”

Ferguson cried again. “I don’t want you happy the way you are. Why don’t
you get married? You haven’t got another wife have you?”

“No,” I said. Catherine laughed.

“It’s nothing to laugh about,” Ferguson said. “Plenty of them have other
wives.”

“We’ll be married, Fergy,” Catherine said, “if it will please you.”

“Not to please me. You should want to be married.”

“We’ve been very busy.”

“Yes. I know. Busy making babies.” I thought she was going to cry again
but she went into bitterness instead. “I suppose you’ll go off with him
now to-night?”

“Yes,” said Catherine. “If he wants me.”

“What about me?”

“Are you afraid to stay here alone?”

“Yes, I am.”

“Then I’ll stay with you.”

“No, go on with him. Go with him right away. I’m sick of seeing both of
you.”

“We’d better finish dinner.”

“No. Go right away.”

“Fergy, be reasonable.”

“I say get out right away. Go away both of you.”

“Let’s go then,” I said. I was sick of Fergy.

“You do want to go. You see you want to leave me even to eat dinner
alone. I’ve always wanted to go to the Italian lakes and this is how it
is. Oh, Oh,” she sobbed, then looked at Catherine and choked.

“We’ll stay till after dinner,” Catherine said. “And I’ll not leave you
alone if you want me to stay. I won’t leave you alone, Fergy.”

“No. No. I want you to go. I want you to go.” She wiped her eyes. “I’m
so unreasonable. Please don’t mind me.”

The girl who served the meal had been upset by all the crying. Now as
she brought in the next course she seemed relieved that things were
better.



That night at the hotel, in our room with the long empty hall outside
and our shoes outside the door, a thick carpet on the floor of the room,
outside the windows the rain falling and in the room light and pleasant
and cheerful, then the light out and it exciting with smooth sheets and
the bed comfortable, feeling that we had come home, feeling no longer
alone, waking in the night to find the other one there, and not gone
away; all other things were unreal. We slept when we were tired and if
we woke the other one woke too so one was not alone. Often a man wishes
to be alone and a girl wishes to be alone too and if they love each
other they are jealous of that in each other, but I can truly say we
never felt that. We could feel alone when we were together, alone
against the others. It has only happened to me like that once. I have
been alone while I was with many girls and that is the way that you can
be most lonely. But we were never lonely and never afraid when we were
together. I know that the night is not the same as the day: that all
things are different, that the things of the night cannot be explained
in the day, because they do not then exist, and the night can be a
dreadful time for lonely people once their loneliness has started. But
with Catherine there was almost no difference in the night except that
it was an even better time. If people bring so much courage to this
world the world has to kill them to break them, so of course it kills
them. The world breaks every one and afterward many are strong at the
broken places. But those that will not break it kills. It kills the very
good and the very gentle and the very brave impartially. If you are none
of these you can be sure it will kill you too but there will be no
special hurry.



I remember waking in the morning. Catherine was asleep and the sunlight
was coming in through the window. The rain had stopped and I stepped out
of bed and across the floor to the window. Down below were the gardens,
bare now but beautifully regular, the gravel paths, the trees, the stone
wall by the lake and the lake in the sunlight with the mountains beyond.
I stood at the window looking out and when I turned away I saw Catherine
was awake and watching me.

“How are you, darling?” she said. “Isn’t it a lovely day?”

“How do you feel?”

“I feel very well. We had a lovely night.”

“Do you want breakfast?”

She wanted breakfast. So did I and we had it in bed, the November
sunlight coming in the window, and the breakfast tray across my lap.

“Don’t you want the paper? You always wanted the paper in the hospital.”

“No,” I said. “I don’t want the paper now.”

“Was it so bad you don’t want even to read about it?”

“I don’t want to read about it.”

“I wish I had been with you so I would know about it too.”

“I’ll tell you about it if I ever get it straight in my head.”

“But won’t they arrest you if they catch you out of uniform?”

“They’ll probably shoot me.”

“Then we’ll not stay here. We’ll get out of the country.”

“I’d thought something of that.”

“We’ll get out. Darling, you shouldn’t take silly chances. Tell me how
did you come from Mestre to Milan?”

“I came on the train. I was in uniform then.”

“Weren’t you in danger then?”

“Not much. I had an old order of movement. I fixed the dates on it in
Mestre.”

“Darling, you’re liable to be arrested here any time. I won’t have it.
It’s silly to do something like that. Where would we be if they took you
off?”

“Let’s not think about it. I’m tired of thinking about it.”

“What would you do if they came to arrest you?”

“Shoot them.”

“You see how silly you are, I won’t let you go out of the hotel until we
leave here.”

“Where are we going to go?”

“Please don’t be that way, darling. We’ll go wherever you say. But
please find some place to go right away.”

“Switzerland is down the lake, we can go there.”

“That will be lovely.”

It was clouding over outside and the lake was darkening.

“I wish we did not always have to live like criminals,” I said.

“Darling, don’t be that way. You haven’t lived like a criminal very
long. And we never live like criminals. We’re going to have a fine
time.”

“I feel like a criminal. I’ve deserted from the army.”

“Darling, _please_ be sensible. It’s not deserting from the army. It’s
only the Italian army.”

I laughed. “You’re a fine girl. Let’s get back into bed. I feel fine in
bed.”



A little while later Catherine said, “You don’t feel like a criminal do
you?”

“No,” I said. “Not when I’m with you.”

“You’re such a silly boy,” she said. “But I’ll look after you. Isn’t it
splendid, darling, that I don’t have any morning-sickness?”

“It’s grand.”

“You don’t appreciate what a fine wife you have. But I don’t care. I’ll
get you some place where they can’t arrest you and then we’ll have a
lovely time.”

“Let’s go there right away.”

“We will, darling. I’ll go any place any time you wish.”

“Let’s not think about anything.”

“All right.”




                              CHAPTER XXXV

Catherine went along the lake to the little hotel to see Ferguson and I
sat in the bar and read the papers. There were comfortable leather
chairs in the bar and I sat in one of them and read until the barman
came in. The army had not stood at the Tagliamento. They were falling
back to the Piave. I remembered the Piave. The railroad crossed it near
San Dona going up to the front. It was deep and slow there and quite
narrow. Down below there were mosquito marshes and canals. There were
some lovely villas. Once, before the war, going up to Cortina D’Ampezzo
I had gone along it for several hours in the hills. Up there it looked
like a trout stream, flowing swiftly with shallow stretches and pools
under the shadow of the rocks. The road turned off from it at Cadore. I
wondered how the army that was up there would come down. The barman came
in.

“Count Greffi was asking for you,” he said.

“Who?”

“Count Greffi. You remember the old man who was here when you were here
before.”

“Is he here?”

“Yes, he’s here with his niece. I told him you were here. He wants you
to play billiards.”

“Where is he?”

“He’s taking a walk.”

“How is he?”

“He’s younger than ever. He drank three champagne cocktails last night
before dinner.”

“How’s his billiard game?”

“Good. He beat me. When I told him you were here he was very pleased.
There’s nobody here for him to play with.”

Count Greffi was ninety-four years old. He had been a contemporary of
Metternich and was an old man with white hair and mustache and beautiful
manners. He had been in the diplomatic service of both Austria and Italy
and his birthday parties were the great social event of Milan. He was
living to be one hundred years old and played a smoothly fluent game of
billiards that contrasted with his own ninety-four-year-old brittleness.
I had met him when I had been at Stresa once before out of season and
while we played billiards we drank champagne. I thought it was a
splendid custom and he gave me fifteen points in a hundred and beat me.

“Why didn’t you tell me he was here?”

“I forgot it.”

“Who else is here?”

“No one you know. There are only six people altogether.”

“What are you doing now?”

“Nothing.”

“Come on out fishing.”

“I could come for an hour.”

“Come on. Bring the trolling line.”

The barman put on a coat and we went out. We went down and got a boat
and I rowed while the barman sat in the stern and let out the line with
a spinner and a heavy sinker on the end to troll for lake trout. We
rowed along the shore, the barman holding the line in his hand and
giving it occasional jerks forward. Stresa looked very deserted from the
lake. There were the long rows of bare trees, the big hotels and the
closed villas. I rowed across to Isola Bella and went close to the
walls, where the water deepened sharply, and you saw the rock wall
slanting down in the clear water, and then up and along to the
fisherman’s island. The sun was under a cloud and the water was dark and
smooth and very cold. We did not have a strike though we saw some
circles on the water from rising fish.

I rowed up opposite the fisherman’s island where there were boats drawn
up and men were mending nets.

“Should we get a drink?”

“All right.”

I brought the boat up to the stone pier and the barman pulled in the
line, coiling it on the bottom of the boat and hooking the spinner on
the edge of the gunwale. I stepped out and tied the boat. We went into a
little café, sat at a bare wooden table and ordered vermouth.

“Are you tired from rowing?”

“No.”

“I’ll row back,” he said.

“I like to row.”

“Maybe if you hold the line it will change the luck.”

“All right.”

“Tell me how goes the war.”

“Rotten.”

“I don’t have to go. I’m too old, like Count Greffi.”

“Maybe you’ll have to go yet.”

“Next year they’ll call my class. But I won’t go.”

“What will you do?”

“Get out of the country. I wouldn’t go to war. I was at the war once in
Abyssinia. Nix. Why do you go?”

“I don’t know. I was a fool.”

“Have another vermouth?”

“All right.”

The barman rowed back. We trolled up the lake beyond Stresa and then
down not far from shore. I held the taut line and felt the faint pulsing
of the spinner revolving while I looked at the dark November water of
the lake and the deserted shore. The barman rowed with long strokes and
on the forward thrust of the boat the line throbbed. Once I had a
strike: the line hardened suddenly and jerked back, I pulled and felt
the live weight of the trout and then the line throbbed again. I had
missed him.

“Did he feel big?”

“Pretty big.”

“Once when I was out trolling alone I had the line in my teeth and one
struck and nearly took my mouth out.”

“The best way is to have it over your leg,” I said. “Then you feel it
and don’t lose your teeth.”

I put my hand in the water. It was very cold. We were almost opposite
the hotel now.

“I have to go in,” the barman said, “to be there for eleven o’clock.
_L’heure du cocktail._”

“All right.”

I pulled in the line and wrapped it on a stick notched at each end. The
barman put the boat in a little slip in the stone wall and locked it
with a chain and padlock.

“Any time you want it,” he said, “I’ll give you the key.”

“Thanks.”

We went up to the hotel and in to the bar. I did not want another drink
so early in the morning so I went up to our room. The maid had just
finished doing the room and Catherine was not back yet. I lay down on
the bed and tried to keep from thinking.

When Catherine came back it was all right again. Ferguson was
downstairs, she said. She was coming to lunch.

“I knew you wouldn’t mind,” Catherine said.

“No,” I said.

“What’s the matter, darling?”

“I don’t know.”

“I know. You haven’t anything to do. All you have is me and I go away.”

“That’s true.”

“I’m sorry, darling. I know it must be a dreadful feeling to have
nothing at all suddenly.”

“My life used to be full of everything,” I said. “Now if you aren’t with
me I haven’t a thing in the world.”

“But I’ll be with you. I was only gone for two hours. Isn’t there
anything you can do?”

“I went fishing with the barman.”

“Wasn’t it fun?”

“Yes.”

“Don’t think about me when I’m not here.”

“That’s the way I worked it at the front. But there was something to do
then.”

“Othello with his occupation gone,” she teased.

“Othello was a nigger,” I said. “Besides, I’m not jealous. I’m just so
in love with you that there isn’t anything else.”

“Will you be a good boy and be nice to Ferguson?”

“I’m always nice to Ferguson unless she curses me.”

“Be nice to her. Think how much we have and she hasn’t anything.”

“I don’t think she wants what we have.”

“You don’t know much, darling, for such a wise boy.”

“I’ll be nice to her.”

“I know you will. You’re so sweet.”

“She won’t stay afterward, will she?”

“No. I’ll get rid of her.”

“And then we’ll come up here.”

“Of course. What do you think I want to do?”

We went downstairs to have lunch with Ferguson. She was very impressed
by the hotel and the splendor of the dining-room. We had a good lunch
with a couple of bottles of white capri. Count Greffi came into the
dining-room and bowed to us. His niece, who looked a little like my
grandmother, was with him. I told Catherine and Ferguson about him and
Ferguson was very impressed. The hotel was very big and grand and empty
but the food was good, the wine was very pleasant and finally the wine
made us all feel very well. Catherine had no need to feel any better.
She was very happy. Ferguson became quite cheerful. I felt very well
myself. After lunch Ferguson went back to her hotel. She was going to
lie down for a while after lunch she said.

Along late in the afternoon some one knocked on our door.

“Who is it?”

“The Count Greffi wishes to know if you will play billiards with him.”

I looked at my watch; I had taken it off and it was under the pillow.

“Do you have to go, darling?” Catherine whispered.

“I think I’d better.” The watch was a quarter-past four o’clock. Out
loud I said, “Tell the Count Greffi I will be in the billiard-room at
five o’clock.”

At a quarter to five I kissed Catherine good-by and went into the
bathroom to dress. Knotting my tie and looking in the glass I looked
strange to myself in the civilian clothes. I must remember to buy some
more shirts and socks.

“Will you be away a long time?” Catherine asked. She looked lovely in
the bed. “Would you hand me the brush?”

I watched her brushing her hair, holding her head so the weight of her
hair all came on one side. It was dark outside and the light over the
head of the bed shone on her hair and on her neck and shoulders. I went
over and kissed her and held her hand with the brush and her head sunk
back on the pillow. I kissed her neck and shoulders. I felt faint with
loving her so much.

“I don’t want to go away.”

“I don’t want you to go away.”

“I won’t go then.”

“Yes. Go. It’s only for a little while and then you’ll come back.”

“We’ll have dinner up here.”

“Hurry and come back.”

I found the Count Greffi in the billiard-room. He was practising
strokes, looking very fragile under the light that came down above the
billiard table. On a card table a little way beyond the light was a
silver icing-bucket with the necks and corks of two champagne bottles
showing above the ice. The Count Greffi straightened up when I came
toward the table and walked toward me. He put out his hand, “It is such
a great pleasure that you are here. You were very kind to come to play
with me.”

“It was very nice of you to ask me.”

“Are you quite well? They told me you were wounded on the Isonzo. I hope
you are well again.”

“I’m very well. Have you been well?”

“Oh, I am always well. But I am getting old. I detect signs of age now.”

“I can’t believe it.”

“Yes. Do you want to know one? It is easier for me to talk Italian. I
discipline myself but I find when I am tired that it is so much easier
to talk Italian. So I know I must be getting old.”

“We could talk Italian. I am a little tired too.”

“Oh, but when you are tired it will be easier for you to talk English.”

“American.”

“Yes. American. You will please talk American. It is a delightful
language.”

“I hardly ever see Americans.”

“You must miss them. One misses one’s countrymen and especially one’s
countrywomen. I know that experience. Should we play or are you too
tired?”

“I’m not really tired. I said that for a joke. What handicap will you
give me?”

“Have you been playing very much?”

“None at all.”

“You play very well. Ten points in a hundred?”

“You flatter me.”

“Fifteen?”

“That would be fine but you will beat me.”

“Should we play for a stake? You always wished to play for a stake.”

“I think we’d better.”

“All right. I will give you eighteen points and we will play for a franc
a point.”

He played a lovely game of billiards and with the handicap I was only
four ahead at fifty. Count Greffi pushed a button on the wall to ring
for the barman.

“Open one bottle please,” he said. Then to me, “We will take a little
stimulant.” The wine was icy cold and very dry and good.

“Should we talk Italian? Would you mind very much? It is my great
weakness now.”

We went on playing, sipping the wine between shots, speaking in Italian,
but talking little, concentrated on the game. Count Greffi made his one
hundredth point and with the handicap I was only at ninety-four. He
smiled and patted me on the shoulder.

“Now we will drink the other bottle and you will tell me about the war.”
He waited for me to sit down.

“About anything else,” I said.

“You don’t want to talk about it? Good. What have you been reading?”

“Nothing,” I said. “I’m afraid I am very dull.”

“No. But you should read.”

“What is there written in war-time?”

“There is ‘Le Feu’ by a Frenchman, Barbusse. There is ‘Mr. Britling Sees
Through It.’”

“No, he doesn’t.”

“What?”

“He doesn’t see through it. Those books were at the hospital.”

“Then you have been reading?”

“Yes, but nothing any good.”

“I thought ‘Mr. Britling’ a very good study of the English middle-class
soul.”

“I don’t know about the soul.”

“Poor boy. We none of us know about the soul. Are you _Croyant_?”

“At night.”

Count Greffi smiled and turned the glass with his fingers. “I had
expected to become more devout as I grow older but somehow I haven’t,”
he said. “It is a great pity.”

“Would you like to live after death?” I asked and instantly felt a fool
to mention death. But he did not mind the word.

“It would depend on the life. This life is very pleasant. I would like
to live forever,” he smiled. “I very nearly have.”

We were sitting in the deep leather chairs, the champagne in the
ice-bucket and our glasses on the table between us.

“If you ever live to be as old as I am you will find many things
strange.”

“You never seem old.”

“It is the body that is old. Sometimes I am afraid I will break off a
finger as one breaks a stick of chalk. And the spirit is no older and
not much wiser.”

“You are wise.”

“No, that is the great fallacy; the wisdom of old men. They do not grow
wise. They grow careful.”

“Perhaps that is wisdom.”

“It is a very unattractive wisdom. What do you value most?”

“Some one I love.”

“With me it is the same. That is not wisdom. Do you value life?”

“Yes.”

“So do I. Because it is all I have. And to give birthday parties,” he
laughed. “You are probably wiser than I am. You do not give birthday
parties.”

We both drank the wine.

“What do you think of the war really?” I asked.

“I think it is stupid.”

“Who will win it?”

“Italy.”

“Why?”

“They are a younger nation.”

“Do younger nations always win wars?”

“They are apt to for a time.”

“Then what happens?”

“They become older nations.”

“You said you were not wise.”

“Dear boy, that is not wisdom. That is cynicism.”

“It sounds very wise to me.”

“It’s not particularly. I could quote you the examples on the other
side. But it is not bad. Have we finished the champagne?”

“Almost.”

“Should we drink some more? Then I must dress.”

“Perhaps we’d better not now.”

“You are sure you don’t want more?”

“Yes.” He stood up.

“I hope you will be very fortunate and very happy and very, very
healthy.”

“Thank you. And I hope you will live forever.”

“Thank you. I have. And if you ever become devout pray for me if I am
dead. I am asking several of my friends to do that. I had expected to
become devout myself but it has not come.” I thought he smiled sadly but
I could not tell. He was so old and his face was very wrinkled, so that
a smile used so many lines that all gradations were lost.

“I might become very devout,” I said. “Anyway, I will pray for you.”

“I had always expected to become devout. All my family died very devout.
But somehow it does not come.”

“It’s too early.”

“Maybe it is too late. Perhaps I have outlived my religious feeling.”

“My own comes only at night.”

“Then too you are in love. Do not forget that is a religious feeling.”

“You believe so?”

“Of course.” He took a step toward the table. “You were very kind to
play.”

“It was a great pleasure.”

“We will walk upstairs together.”




                             CHAPTER XXXVI

That night there was a storm and I woke to hear the rain lashing the
window-panes. It was coming in the open window. Some one had knocked on
the door. I went to the door very softly, not to disturb Catherine, and
opened it. The barman stood there. He wore his overcoat and carried his
wet hat.

“Can I speak to you, Tenente?”

“What’s the matter?”

“It’s a very serious matter.”

I looked around. The room was dark. I saw the water on the floor from
the window. “Come in,” I said. I took him by the arm into the bathroom;
locked the door and put on the light. I sat down on the edge of the
bathtub.

“What’s the matter, Emilio? Are you in trouble?”

“No. You are, Tenente.”

“Yes?”

“They are going to arrest you in the morning.”

“Yes?”

“I came to tell you. I was out in the town and I heard them talking in a
café.”

“I see.”

He stood there, his coat wet, holding his wet hat and said nothing.

“Why are they going to arrest me?”

“For something about the war.”

“Do you know what?”

“No. But I know that they know you were here before as an officer and
now you are here out of uniform. After this retreat they arrest
everybody.”

I thought a minute.

“What time do they come to arrest me?”

“In the morning. I don’t know the time.”

“What do you say to do?”

He put his hat in the washbowl. It was very wet and had been dripping on
the floor.

“If you have nothing to fear an arrest is nothing. But it is always bad
to be arrested—especially now.”

“I don’t want to be arrested.”

“Then go to Switzerland.”

“How?”

“In my boat.”

“There is a storm,” I said.

“The storm is over. It is rough but you will be all right.”

“When should we go?”

“Right away. They might come to arrest you early in the morning.”

“What about our bags?”

“Get them packed. Get your lady dressed. I will take care of them.”

“Where will you be?”

“I will wait here. I don’t want any one to see me outside in the hall.”

I opened the door, closed it, and went into the bedroom. Catherine was
awake.

“What is it, darling?”

“It’s all right, Cat,” I said. “Would you like to get dressed right away
and go in a boat to Switzerland?”

“Would you?”

“No,” I said. “I’d like to go back to bed.”

“What is it about?”

“The barman says they are going to arrest me in the morning.”

“Is the barman crazy?”

“No.”

“Then please hurry, darling, and get dressed so we can start.” She sat
up on the side of the bed. She was still sleepy. “Is that the barman in
the bathroom?”

“Yes.”

“Then I won’t wash. Please look the other way, darling, and I’ll be
dressed in just a minute.”

I saw her white back as she took off her nightgown and then I looked
away because she wanted me to. She was beginning to be a little big with
the child and she did not want me to see her. I dressed hearing the rain
on the windows. I did not have much to put in my bag.

“There’s plenty of room in my bag, Cat, if you need any.”

“I’m almost packed,” she said. “Darling, I’m awfully stupid, but why is
the barman in the bathroom?”

“Sh—he’s waiting to take our bags down.”

“He’s awfully nice.”

“He’s an old friend,” I said. “I nearly sent him some pipe-tobacco
once.”

I looked out the open window at the dark night. I could not see the
lake, only the dark and the rain but the wind was quieter.

“I’m ready, darling,” Catherine said.

“All right.” I went to the bathroom door. “Here are the bags, Emilio,” I
said. The barman took the two bags.

“You’re very good to help us,” Catherine said.

“That’s nothing, lady,” the barman said. “I’m glad to help you just so I
don’t get in trouble myself. Listen,” he said to me. “I’ll take these
out the servants’ stairs and to the boat. You just go out as though you
were going for a walk.”

“It’s a lovely night for a walk,” Catherine said.

“It’s a bad night all right.”

“I’m glad I’ve an umbrella,” Catherine said.

We walked down the hall and down the wide thickly carpeted stairs. At
the foot of the stairs by the door the porter sat behind his desk.

He looked surprised at seeing us.

“You’re not going out, sir?” he said.

“Yes,” I said. “We’re going to see the storm along the lake.”

“Haven’t you got an umbrella, sir?”

“No,” I said. “This coat sheds water.”

He looked at it doubtfully. “I’ll get you an umbrella, sir,” he said. He
went away and came back with a big umbrella. “It is a little big, sir,”
he said. I gave him a ten-lira note. “Oh you are too good, sir. Thank
you very much,” he said. He held the door open and we went out into the
rain. He smiled at Catherine and she smiled at him. “Don’t stay out in
the storm,” he said. “You will get wet, sir and lady.” He was only the
second porter, and his English was still literally translated.

“We’ll be back,” I said. We walked down the path under the giant
umbrella and out through the dark wet gardens to the road and across the
road to the trellised pathway along the lake. The wind was blowing
offshore now. It was a cold, wet November wind and I knew it was snowing
in the mountains. We came along past the chained boats in the slips
along the quay to where the barman’s boat should be. The water was dark
against the stone. The barman stepped out from beside the row of trees.

“The bags are in the boat,” he said.

“I want to pay you for the boat,” I said.

“How much money have you?”

“Not so much.”

“You send me the money later. That will be all right.”

“How much?”

“What you want.”

“Tell me how much.”

“If you get through send me five hundred francs. You won’t mind that if
you get through.”

“All right.”

“Here are sandwiches.” He handed me a package. “Everything there was in
the bar. It’s all here. This is a bottle of brandy and a bottle of
wine.” I put them in my bag. “Let me pay you for those.”

“All right, give me fifty lire.”

I gave it to him. “The brandy is good,” he said. “You don’t need to be
afraid to give it to your lady. She better get in the boat.” He held the
boat, it rising and falling against the stone wall and I helped
Catherine in. She sat in the stern and pulled her cape around her.

“You know where to go?”

“Up the lake.”

“You know how far?”

“Past Luino.”

“Past Luino, Cannero, Cannobio, Tranzano. You aren’t in Switzerland
until you come to Brissago. You have to pass Monte Tamara.”

“What time is it?” Catherine asked.

“It’s only eleven o’clock,” I said.

“If you row all the time you ought to be there by seven o’clock in the
morning.”

“Is it that far?”

“It’s thirty-five kilometres.”

“How should we go? In this rain we need a compass.”

“No. Row to Isola Bella. Then on the other side of Isola Madre go with
the wind. The wind will take you to Pallanza. You will see the lights.
Then go up the shore.”

“Maybe the wind will change.”

“No,” he said. “This wind will blow like this for three days. It comes
straight down from the Mattarone. There is a can to bail with.”

“Let me pay you something for the boat now.”

“No, I’d rather take a chance. If you get through you pay me all you
can.”

“All right.”

“I don’t think you’ll get drowned.”

“That’s good.”

“Go with the wind up the lake.”

“All right.” I stepped in the boat.

“Did you leave the money for the hotel?”

“Yes. In an envelope in the room.”

“All right. Good luck, Tenente.”

“Good luck. We thank you many times.”

“You won’t thank me if you get drowned.”

“What does he say?” Catherine asked.

“He says good luck.”

“Good luck,” Catherine said. “Thank you very much.”

“Are you ready?”

“Yes.”

He bent down and shoved us off. I dug at the water with the oars, then
waved one hand. The barman waved back deprecatingly. I saw the lights of
the hotel and rowed out, rowing straight out until they were out of
sight. There was quite a sea running but we were going with the wind.




                             CHAPTER XXXVII

I rowed in the dark keeping the wind in my face. The rain had stopped
and only came occasionally in gusts. It was very dark, and the wind was
cold. I could see Catherine in the stern but I could not see the water
where the blades of the oars dipped. The oars were long and there were
no leathers to keep them from slipping out. I pulled, raised, leaned
forward, found the water, dipped and pulled, rowing as easily as I
could. I did not feather the oars because the wind was with us. I knew
my hands would blister and I wanted to delay it as long as I could. The
boat was light and rowed easily. I pulled it along in the dark water. I
could not see, and hoped we would soon come opposite Pallanza.

We never saw Pallanza. The wind was blowing up the lake and we passed
the point that hides Pallanza in the dark and never saw the lights. When
we finally saw some lights much further up the lake and close to the
shore it was Intra. But for a long time we did not see any lights, nor
did we see the shore but rowed steadily in the dark riding with the
waves. Sometimes I missed the water with the oars in the dark as a wave
lifted the boat. It was quite rough; but I kept on rowing, until
suddenly we were close ashore against a point of rock that rose beside
us; the waves striking against it, rushing high up, then falling back. I
pulled hard on the right oar and backed water with the other and we went
out into the lake again; the point was out of sight and we were going on
up the lake.

“We’re across the lake,” I said to Catherine.

“Weren’t we going to see Pallanza?”

“We’ve missed it.”

“How are you, darling?”

“I’m fine.”

“I could take the oars awhile.”

“No, I’m fine.”

“Poor Ferguson,” Catherine said. “In the morning she’ll come to the
hotel and find we’re gone.”

“I’m not worrying so much about that,” I said, “as about getting into
the Swiss part of the lake before it’s daylight and the custom guards
see us.”

“Is it a long way?”

“It’s thirty some kilometres from here.”



I rowed all night. Finally my hands were so sore I could hardly close
them over the oars. We were nearly smashed up on the shore several
times. I kept fairly close to the shore because I was afraid of getting
lost on the lake and losing time. Sometimes we were so close we could
see a row of trees and the road along the shore with the mountains
behind. The rain stopped and the wind drove the clouds so that the moon
shone through and looking back I could see the long dark point of
Castagnola and the lake with white-caps and beyond, the moon on the high
snow mountains. Then the clouds came over the moon again and the
mountains and the lake were gone, but it was much lighter than it had
been before and we could see the shore. I could see it too clearly and
pulled out where they would not see the boat if there were custom guards
along the Pallanza road. When the moon came out again we could see white
villas on the shore on the slopes of the mountain and the white road
where it showed through the trees. All the time I was rowing.

The lake widened and across it on the shore at the foot of the mountains
on the other side we saw a few lights that should be Luino. I saw a
wedgelike gap between the mountains on the other shore and I thought
that must be Luino. If it was we were making good time. I pulled in the
oars and lay back on the seat. I was very, very tired of rowing. My arms
and shoulders and back ached and my hands were sore.

“I could hold the umbrella,” Catherine said. “We could sail with that
with the wind.”

“Can you steer?”

“I think so.”

“You take this oar and hold it under your arm close to the side of the
boat and steer and I’ll hold the umbrella.” I went back to the stern and
showed her how to hold the oar. I took the big umbrella the porter had
given me and sat facing the bow and opened it. It opened with a clap. I
held it on both sides, sitting astride the handle hooked over the seat.
The wind was full in it and I felt the boat suck forward while I held as
hard as I could to the two edges. It pulled hard. The boat was moving
fast.

“We’re going beautifully,” Catherine said. All I could see was umbrella
ribs. The umbrella strained and pulled and I felt us driving along with
it. I braced my feet and held back on it, then suddenly, it buckled; I
felt a rib snap on my forehead, I tried to grab the top that was bending
with the wind and the whole thing buckled and went inside-out and I was
astride the handle of an inside-out, ripped umbrella, where I had been
holding a wind-filled pulling sail. I unhooked the handle from the seat,
laid the umbrella in the bow and went back to Catherine for the oar. She
was laughing. She took my hand and kept on laughing.

“What’s the matter?” I took the oar.

“You looked so funny holding that thing.”

“I suppose so.”

“Don’t be cross, darling. It was awfully funny. You looked about twenty
feet broad and very affectionate holding the umbrella by the edges—”
she choked.

“I’ll row.”

“Take a rest and a drink. It’s a grand night and we’ve come a long way.”

“I have to keep the boat out of the trough of the waves.”

“I’ll get you a drink. Then rest a little while, darling.”

I held the oars up and we sailed with them. Catherine was opening the
bag. She handed me the brandy bottle. I pulled the cork with my
pocket-knife and took a long drink. It was smooth and hot and the heat
went all through me and I felt warmed and cheerful. “It’s lovely
brandy,” I said. The moon was under again but I could see the shore.
There seemed to be another point going out a long way ahead into the
lake.

“Are you warm enough, Cat?”

“I’m splendid. I’m a little stiff.”

“Bail out that water and you can put your feet down.”

Then I rowed and listened to the oarlocks and the dip and scrape of the
bailing tin under the stern seat.

“Would you give me the bailer?” I said. “I want a drink.”

“It’s awfully dirty.”

“That’s all right. I’ll rinse it.”

I heard Catherine rinsing it over the side. Then she handed it to me
dipped full of water. I was thirsty after the brandy and the water was
icy cold, so cold it made my teeth ache. I looked toward the shore. We
were closer to the long point. There were lights in the bay ahead.

“Thanks,” I said and handed back the tin pail.

“You’re ever so welcome,” Catherine said. “There’s much more if you want
it.”

“Don’t you want to eat something?”

“No. I’ll be hungry in a little while. We’ll save it till then.”

“All right.”

What looked like a point ahead was a long high headland. I went further
out in the lake to pass it. The lake was much narrower now. The moon was
out again and the _guardia di Finanza_ could have seen our boat black on
the water if they had been watching.

“How are you, Cat?” I asked.

“I’m all right. Where are we?”

“I don’t think we have more than about eight miles more.”

“That’s a long way to row, you poor sweet. Aren’t you dead?”

“No. I’m all right. My hands are sore is all.”

We went on up the lake. There was a break in the mountains on the right
bank, a flattening-out with a low shore-line that I thought must be
Cannobio. I stayed a long way out because it was from now on that we ran
the most danger of meeting _guardia_. There was a high dome-capped
mountain on the other shore a way ahead. I was tired. It was no great
distance to row but when you were out of condition it had been a long
way. I knew I had to pass that mountain and go up the lake at least five
miles further before we would be in Swiss water. The moon was almost
down now but before it went down the sky clouded over again and it was
very dark. I stayed well out in the lake, rowing awhile, then resting
and holding the oars so that the wind struck the blades.

“Let me row awhile,” Catherine said.

“I don’t think you ought to.”

“Nonsense. It would be good for me. It would keep me from being too
stiff.”

“I don’t think you should, Cat.”

“Nonsense. Rowing in moderation is very good for the pregnant lady.”

“All right, you row a little moderately. I’ll go back, then you come up.
Hold on to both gunwales when you come up.”

I sat in the stern with my coat on and the collar turned up and watched
Catherine row. She rowed very well but the oars were too long and
bothered her. I opened the bag and ate a couple of sandwiches and took a
drink of the brandy. It made everything much better and I took another
drink.

“Tell me when you’re tired,” I said. Then a little later, “watch out the
oar doesn’t pop you in the tummy.”

“If it did”—Catherine said between strokes—“life might be much
simpler.”

I took another drink of the brandy.

“How are you going?”

“All right.”

“Tell me when you want to stop.”

“All right.”

I took another drink of the brandy, then took hold of the two gunwales
of the boat and moved forward.

“No. I’m going beautifully.”

“Go on back to the stern. I’ve had a grand rest.”

For a while, with the brandy, I rowed easily and steadily. Then I began
to catch crabs and soon I was just chopping along again with a thin
brown taste of bile from having rowed too hard after the brandy.

“Give me a drink of water, will you?” I said.

“That’s easy,” Catherine said.

Before daylight it started to drizzle. The wind was down or we were
protected by mountains that bounded the curve the lake had made. When I
knew daylight was coming I settled down and rowed hard. I did not know
where we were and I wanted to get into the Swiss part of the lake. When
it was beginning to be daylight we were quite close to the shore. I
could see the rocky shore and the trees.

“What’s that?” Catherine said. I rested on the oars and listened. It was
a motor boat chugging out on the lake. I pulled close up to the shore
and lay quiet. The chugging came closer; then we saw the motor boat in
the rain a little astern of us. There were four _guardia_ _di finanza_
in the stern, their _alpini_ hats pulled down, their cape collars turned
up and their carbines slung across their backs. They all looked sleepy
so early in the morning. I could see the yellow on their hats and the
yellow marks on their cape collars. The motor boat chugged on and out of
sight in the rain.

I pulled out into the lake. If we were that close to the border I did
not want to be hailed by a sentry along the road. I stayed out where I
could just see the shore and rowed on for three-quarters of an hour in
the rain. We heard a motor boat once more but I kept quiet until the
noise of the engine went away across the lake.

“I think we’re in Switzerland, Cat,” I said.

“Really?”

“There’s no way to know until we see Swiss troops.”

“Or the Swiss navy.”

“The Swiss navy’s no joke for us. That last motor boat we heard was
probably the Swiss navy.”

“If we’re in Switzerland let’s have a big breakfast. They have wonderful
rolls and butter and jam in Switzerland.”



It was clear daylight now and a fine rain was falling. The wind was
still blowing outside up the lake and we could see the tops of the
white-caps going away from us and up the lake. I was sure we were in
Switzerland now. There were many houses back in the trees from the shore
and up the shore a way was a village with stone houses, some villas on
the hills and a church. I had been looking at the road that skirted the
shore for guards but did not see any. The road came quite close to the
lake now and I saw a soldier coming out of a café on the road. He wore a
gray-green uniform and a helmet like the Germans. He had a
healthy-looking face and a little toothbrush mustache. He looked at us.

“Wave to him,” I said to Catherine. She waved and the soldier smiled
embarrassedly and gave a wave of his hand. I eased up rowing. We were
passing the waterfront of the village.

“We must be well inside the border,” I said.

“We want to be sure, darling. We don’t want them to turn us back at the
frontier.”

“The frontier is a long way back. I think this is the customs town. I’m
pretty sure it’s Brissago.”

“Won’t there be Italians there? There are always both sides at a customs
town.”

“Not in war-time. I don’t think they let the Italians cross the
frontier.”

It was a nice-looking little town. There were many fishing boats along
the quay and nets were spread on racks. There was a fine November rain
falling but it looked cheerful and clean even with the rain.

“Should we land then and have breakfast?”

“All right.”

I pulled hard on the left oar and came in close, then straightened out
when we were close to the quay and brought the boat alongside. I pulled
in the oars, took hold of an iron ring, stepped up on the wet stone and
was in Switzerland. I tied the boat and held my hand down to Catherine.

“Come on up, Cat. It’s a grand feeling.”

“What about the bags?”

“Leave them in the boat.”

Catherine stepped up and we were in Switzerland together.

“What a lovely country,” she said.

“Isn’t it grand?”

“Let’s go and have breakfast!”

“Isn’t it a grand country? I love the way it feels under my shoes.”

“I’m so stiff I can’t feel it very well. But it feels like a splendid
country. Darling, do you realize we’re here and out of that bloody
place?”

“I do. I really do. I’ve never realized anything before.”

“Look at the houses. Isn’t this a fine square? There’s a place we can
get breakfast.”

“Isn’t the rain fine? They never had rain like this in Italy. It’s
cheerful rain.”

“And we’re here, darling! Do you realize we’re here?”

We went inside the café and sat down at a clean wooden table. We were
cockeyed excited. A splendid clean-looking woman with an apron came and
asked us what we wanted.

“Rolls and jam and coffee,” Catherine said.

“I’m sorry, we haven’t any rolls in war-time.”

“Bread then.”

“I can make you some toast.”

“All right.”

“I want some eggs fried too.”

“How many eggs for the gentleman?”

“Three.”

“Take four, darling.”

“Four eggs.”

The woman went away. I kissed Catherine and held her hand very tight. We
looked at each other and at the café.

“Darling, darling, isn’t it lovely?”

“It’s grand,” I said.

“I don’t mind there not being rolls,” Catherine said. “I thought about
them all night. But I don’t mind it. I don’t mind it at all.”

“I suppose pretty soon they will arrest us.”

“Never mind, darling. We’ll have breakfast first. You won’t mind being
arrested after breakfast. And then there’s nothing they can do to us.
We’re British and American citizens in good standing.”

“You have a passport, haven’t you?”

“Of course. Oh let’s not talk about it. Let’s be happy.”

“I couldn’t be any happier,” I said. A fat gray cat with a tail that
lifted like a plume crossed the floor to our table and curved against my
leg to purr each time she rubbed. I reached down and stroked her.
Catherine smiled at me very happily. “Here comes the coffee,” she said.



They arrested us after breakfast. We took a little walk through the
village then went down to the quay to get our bags. A soldier was
standing guard over the boat.

“Is this your boat?”

“Yes.”

“Where do you come from?”

“Up the lake.”

“Then I have to ask you to come with me.”

“How about the bags?”

“You can carry the bags.”

I carried the bags and Catherine walked beside me and the soldier walked
along behind us to the old custom house. In the custom house a
lieutenant, very thin and military, questioned us.

“What nationality are you?”

“American and British.”

“Let me see your passports.”

I gave him mine and Catherine got hers out of her handbag.

He examined them for a long time.

“Why do you enter Switzerland this way in a boat?”

“I am a sportsman,” I said. “Rowing is my great sport. I always row when
I get a chance.”

“Why do you come here?”

“For the winter sport. We are tourists and we want to do the winter
sport.”

“This is no place for winter sport.”

“We know it. We want to go where they have the winter sport.”

“What have you been doing in Italy?”

“I have been studying architecture. My cousin has been studying art.”

“Why do you leave there?”

“We want to do the winter sport. With the war going on you cannot study
architecture.”

“You will please stay where you are,” the lieutenant said. He went back
into the building with our passports.

“You’re splendid, darling,” Catherine said. “Keep on the same track. You
want to do the winter sport.”

“Do you know anything about art?”

“Rubens,” said Catherine.

“Large and fat,” I said.

“Titian,” Catherine said.

“Titian-haired,” I said. “How about Mantegna?”

“Don’t ask hard ones,” Catherine said. “I know him though—very bitter.”

“Very bitter,” I said. “Lots of nail holes.”

“You see I’ll make you a fine wife,” Catherine said. “I’ll be able to
talk art with your customers.”

“Here he comes,” I said. The thin lieutenant came down the length of the
custom house, holding our passports.

“I will have to send you into Locarno,” he said. “You can get a carriage
and a soldier will go in with you.”

“All right,” I said. “What about the boat?”

“The boat is confiscated. What have you in those bags?”

He went all through the two bags and held up the quarter-bottle of
brandy. “Would you join me in a drink?” I asked.

“No thank you.” He straightened up. “How much money have you?”

“Twenty-five hundred lire.”

He was favorably impressed. “How much has your cousin?”

Catherine had a little over twelve hundred lire. The lieutenant was
pleased. His attitude toward us became less haughty.

“If you are going for winter sports,” he said, “Wengen is the place. My
father has a very fine hotel at Wengen. It is open all the time.”

“That’s splendid,” I said. “Could you give me the name?”

“I will write it on a card.” He handed me the card very politely.

“The soldier will take you in to Locarno. He will keep your passports. I
regret this but it is necessary. I have good hopes they will give you a
visa or a police permit at Locarno.”

He handed the two passports to the soldier and carrying the bags we
started into the village to order a carriage. “Hi,” the lieutenant
called to the soldier. He said something in a German dialect to him. The
soldier slung his rifle on his back and picked up the bags.

“It’s a great country,” I said to Catherine.

“It’s so practical.”

“Thank you very much,” I said to the lieutenant. He waved his hand.

_“Service!_” he said. We followed our guard into the village.

We drove to Locarno in a carriage with the soldier sitting on the front
seat with the driver. At Locarno we did not have a bad time. They
questioned us but they were polite because we had passports and money. I
do not think they believed a word of the story and I thought it was
silly but it was like a law-court. You did not want something
reasonable, you wanted something technical and then stuck to it without
explanations. But we had passports and we would spend the money. So they
gave us provisional visas. At any time this visa might be withdrawn. We
were to report to the police wherever we went.

Could we go wherever we wanted? Yes. Where did we want to go?

“Where do you want to go, Cat?”

“Montreux.”

“It is a very nice place,” the official said. “I think you will like
that place.”

“Here at Locarno is a very nice place,” another official said. “I am
sure you would like it here very much at Locarno. Locarno is a very
attractive place.”

“We would like some place where there is winter sport.”

“There is no winter sport at Montreux.”

“I beg your pardon,” the other official said. “I come from Montreux.
There is very certainly winter sport on the Montreux Oberland Bernois
railway. It would be false for you to deny that.”

“I do not deny it. I simply said there is no winter sport at Montreux.”

“I question that,” the other official said. “I question that statement.”

“I hold to that statement.”

“I question that statement. I myself have _luge-ed_ into the streets of
Montreux. I have done it not once but several times. Luge-ing is
certainly winter sport.”

The other official turned to me.

“Is luge-ing your idea of winter sport, sir? I tell you you would be
very comfortable here in Locarno. You would find the climate healthy,
you would find the environs attractive. You would like it very much.”

“The gentleman has expressed a wish to go to Montreux.”

“What is luge-ing?” I asked.

“You see he has never even heard of luge-ing!”

That meant a great deal to the second official. He was pleased by that.

“Luge-ing,” said the first official, “is tobogganing.”

“I beg to differ,” the other official shook his head. “I must differ
again. The toboggan is very different from the luge. The toboggan is
constructed in Canada of flat laths. The luge is a common sled with
runners. Accuracy means something.”

“Couldn’t we toboggan?” I asked.

“Of course you could toboggan,” the first official said. “You could
toboggan very well. Excellent Canadian toboggans are sold in Montreux.
Ochs Brothers sell toboggans. They import their own toboggans.”

The second official turned away. “Tobogganing,” he said, “requires a
special _piste_. You could not toboggan into the streets of Montreux.
Where are you stopping here?”

“We don’t know,” I said. “We just drove in from Brissago. The carriage
is outside.”

“You make no mistake in going to Montreux,” the first official said.
“You will find the climate delightful and beautiful. You will have no
distance to go for winter sport.”

“If you really want winter sport,” the second official said, “you will
go to the Engadine or to Mürren. I must protest against your being
advised to go to Montreux for the winter sport.”

“At Les Avants above Montreux there is excellent winter sport of every
sort.” The champion of Montreux glared at his colleague.

“Gentlemen,” I said, “I am afraid we must go. My cousin is very tired.
We will go tentatively to Montreux.”

“I congratulate you,” the first official shook my hand.

“I believe that you will regret leaving Locarno,” the second official
said. “At any rate you will report to the police at Montreux.”

“There will be no unpleasantness with the police,” the first official
assured me. “You will find all the inhabitants extremely courteous and
friendly.”

“Thank you both very much,” I said. “We appreciate your advice very
much.”

“Good-by,” Catherine said. “Thank you both very much.”

They bowed us to the door, the champion of Locarno a little coldly. We
went down the steps and into the carriage.

“My God, darling,” Catherine said. “Couldn’t we have gotten away any
sooner?” I gave the name of a hotel one of the officials had recommended
to the driver. He picked up the reins.

“You’ve forgotten the army,” Catherine said. The soldier was standing by
the carriage. I gave him a ten-lira note. “I have no Swiss money yet,” I
said. He thanked me, saluted and went off. The carriage started and we
drove to the hotel.

“How did you happen to pick out Montreux?” I asked Catherine. “Do you
really want to go there?”

“It was the first place I could think of,” she said. “It’s not a bad
place. We can find some place up in the mountains.”

“Are you sleepy?”

“I’m asleep right now.”

“We’ll get a good sleep. Poor Cat, you had a long bad night.”

“I had a lovely time,” Catherine said. “Especially when you sailed with
the umbrella.”

“Can you realize we’re in Switzerland?”

“No, I’m afraid I’ll wake up and it won’t be true.”

“I am too.”

“It is true, isn’t it, darling? I’m not just driving down to the
_stazione_ in Milan to see you off.”

“I hope not.”

“Don’t say that. It frightens me. Maybe that’s where we’re going.”

“I’m so groggy I don’t know,” I said.

“Let me see your hands.”

I put them out. They were both blistered raw.

“There’s no hole in my side,” I said.

“Don’t be sacrilegious.”

I felt very tired and vague in the head. The exhilaration was all gone.
The carriage was going along the street.

“Poor hands,” Catherine said.

“Don’t touch them,” I said. “By God I don’t know where we are. Where are
we going, driver?” The driver stopped his horse.

“To the Hotel Metropole. Don’t you want to go there?”

“Yes,” I said. “It’s all right, Cat.”

“It’s all right, darling. Don’t be upset. We’ll get a good sleep and you
won’t feel groggy to-morrow.”

“I get pretty groggy,” I said. “It’s like a comic opera to-day. Maybe
I’m hungry.”

“You’re just tired, darling. You’ll be fine.” The carriage pulled up
before the hotel. Some one came out to take our bags.

“I feel all right,” I said. We were down on the pavement going into the
hotel.

“I know you’ll be all right. You’re just tired. You’ve been up a long
time.”

“Anyhow we’re here.”

“Yes, we’re really here.”

We followed the boy with the bags into the hotel.




                                 BOOK V




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII

That fall the snow came very late. We lived in a brown wooden house in
the pine trees on the side of the mountain and at night there was frost
so that there was thin ice over the water in the two pitchers on the
dresser in the morning. Mrs. Guttingen came into the room early in the
morning to shut the windows and started a fire in the tall porcelain
stove. The pine wood crackled and sparked and then the fire roared in
the stove and the second time Mrs. Guttingen came into the room she
brought big chunks of wood for the fire and a pitcher of hot water. When
the room was warm she brought in breakfast. Sitting up in bed eating
breakfast we could see the lake and the mountains across the lake on the
French side. There was snow on the tops of the mountains and the lake
was a gray steel-blue.

Outside, in front of the chalet a road went up the mountain. The wheel
ruts and ridges were iron hard with the frost, and the road climbed
steadily through the forest and up and around the mountain to where
there were meadows, and barns and cabins in the meadows at the edge of
the woods looking across the valley. The valley was deep and there was a
stream at the bottom that flowed down into the lake and when the wind
blew across the valley you could hear the stream in the rocks.

Sometimes we went off the road and on a path through the pine forest.
The floor of the forest was soft to walk on; the frost did not harden it
as it did the road. But we did not mind the hardness of the road because
we had nails in the soles and heels of our boots and the heel nails bit
on the frozen ruts and with nailed boots it was good walking on the road
and invigorating. But it was lovely walking in the woods.

In front of the house where we lived the mountain went down steeply to
the little plain along the lake and we sat on the porch of the house in
the sun and saw the winding of the road down the mountain-side and the
terraced vineyards on the side of the lower mountain, the vines all dead
now for the winter and the fields divided by stone walls, and below the
vineyards the houses of the town on the narrow plain along the lake
shore. There was an island with two trees on the lake and the trees
looked like the double sails of a fishing-boat. The mountains were sharp
and steep on the other side of the lake and down at the end of the lake
was the plain of the Rhone Valley flat between the two ranges of
mountains; and up the valley where the mountains cut it off was the Dent
du Midi. It was a high snowy mountain and it dominated the valley but it
was so far away that it did not make a shadow.

When the sun was bright we ate lunch on the porch but the rest of the
time we ate upstairs in a small room with plain wooden walls and a big
stove in the corner. We bought books and magazines in the town and a
copy of “Hoyle” and learned many two-handed card games. The small room
with the stove was our living-room. There were two comfortable chairs
and a table for books and magazines and we played cards on the
dining-table when it was cleared away. Mr. and Mrs. Guttingen lived
downstairs and we would hear them talking sometimes in the evening and
they were very happy together too. He had been a headwaiter and she had
worked as maid in the same hotel and they had saved their money to buy
this place. They had a son who was studying to be a headwaiter. He was
at a hotel in Zurich. Downstairs there was a parlor where they sold wine
and beer, and sometimes in the evening we would hear carts stop outside
on the road and men come up the steps to go in the parlor to drink wine.

There was a box of wood in the hall outside the living-room and I kept
up the fire from it. But we did not stay up very late. We went to bed in
the dark in the big bedroom and when I was undressed I opened the
windows and saw the night and the cold stars and the pine trees below
the window and then got into bed as fast as I could. It was lovely in
bed with the air so cold and clear and the night outside the window. We
slept well and if I woke in the night I knew it was from only one cause
and I would shift the feather bed over, very softly so that Catherine
would not be wakened and then go back to sleep again, warm and with the
new lightness of thin covers. The war seemed as far away as the football
games of some one else’s college. But I knew from the papers that they
were still fighting in the mountains because the snow would not come.



Sometimes we walked down the mountain into Montreux. There was a path
went down the mountain but it was steep and so usually we took the road
and walked down on the wide hard road between fields and then below
between the stone walls of the vineyards and on down between the houses
of the villages along the way. There were three villages; Chernex,
Fontanivent, and the other I forget. Then along the road we passed an
old square-built stone château on a ledge on the side of the
mountain-side with the terraced fields of vines, each vine tied to a
stick to hold it up, the vines dry and brown and the earth ready for the
snow and the lake down below flat and gray as steel. The road went down
a long grade below the château and then turned to the right and went
down very steeply and paved with cobbles, into Montreux.

We did not know any one in Montreux. We walked along beside the lake and
saw the swans and the many gulls and terns that flew up when you came
close and screamed while they looked down at the water. Out on the lake
there were flocks of grebes, small and dark, and leaving trails in the
water when they swam. In the town we walked along the main street and
looked in the windows of the shops. There were many big hotels that were
closed but most of the shops were open and the people were very glad to
see us. There was a fine coiffeur’s place where Catherine went to have
her hair done. The woman who ran it was very cheerful and the only
person we knew in Montreux. While Catherine was there I went up to a
beer place and drank dark Munich beer and read the papers. I read the
_Corriere Della Sera_ and the English and American papers from Paris.
All the advertisements were blacked out, supposedly to prevent
communication in that way with the enemy. The papers were bad reading.
Everything was going very badly everywhere. I sat back in the corner
with a heavy mug of dark beer and an opened glazed-paper package of
pretzels and ate the pretzels for the salty flavor and the good way they
made the beer taste and read about disaster. I thought Catherine would
come by but she did not come, so I hung the papers back on the rack,
paid for my beer and went up the street to look for her. The day was
cold and dark and wintry and the stone of the houses looked cold.
Catherine was still in the hair-dresser’s shop. The woman was waving her
hair. I sat in the little booth and watched. It was exciting to watch
and Catherine smiled and talked to me and my voice was a little thick
from being excited. The tongs made a pleasant clicking sound and I could
see Catherine in three mirrors and it was pleasant and warm in the
booth. Then the woman put up Catherine’s hair, and Catherine looked in
the mirror and changed it a little, taking out and putting in pins; then
stood up. “I’m sorry to have taken such a long time.”

“Monsieur was very interested. Were you not, monsieur?” the woman
smiled.

“Yes,” I said.

We went out and up the street. It was cold and wintry and the wind was
blowing. “Oh, darling, I love you so,” I said.

“Don’t we have a fine time?” Catherine said. “Look. Let’s go some place
and have beer instead of tea. It’s very good for young Catherine. It
keeps her small.”

“Young Catherine,” I said. “That loafer.”

“She’s been very good,” Catherine said. “She makes very little trouble.
The doctor says beer will be good for me and keep her small.”

“If you keep her small enough and she’s a boy, maybe he will be a
jockey.”

“I suppose if we really have this child we ought to get married,”
Catherine said. We were in the beer place at the corner table. It was
getting dark outside. It was still early but the day was dark and the
dusk was coming early.

“Let’s get married now,” I said.

“No,” Catherine said. “It’s too embarrassing now. I show too plainly. I
won’t go before any one and be married in this state.”

“I wish we’d gotten married.”

“I suppose it would have been better. But when could we, darling?”

“I don’t know.”

“I know one thing. I’m not going to be married in this splendid matronly
state.”

“You’re not matronly.”

“Oh yes, I am, darling. The hairdresser asked me if this was our first.
I lied and said no, we had two boys and two girls.”

“When will we be married?”

“Any time after I’m thin again. We want to have a splendid wedding with
every one thinking what a handsome young couple.”

“And you’re not worried?”

“Darling, why should I be worried? The only time I ever felt badly was
when I felt like a whore in Milan and that only lasted seven minutes and
besides it was the room furnishings. Don’t I make you a good wife?”

“You’re a lovely wife.”

“Then don’t be too technical, darling. I’ll marry you as soon as I’m
thin again.”

“All right.”

“Do you think I ought to drink another beer? The doctor said I was
rather narrow in the hips and it’s all for the best if we keep young
Catherine small.”

“What else did he say?” I was worried.

“Nothing. I have a wonderful blood-pressure, darling. He admired my
blood-pressure greatly.”

“What did he say about you being too narrow in the hips?”

“Nothing. Nothing at all. He said I shouldn’t ski.”

“Quite right.”

“He said it was too late to start if I’d never done it before. He said I
could ski if I wouldn’t fall down.”

“He’s just a big-hearted joker.”

“Really he was very nice. We’ll have him when the baby comes.”

“Did you ask him if you ought to get married?”

“No. I told him we’d been married four years. You see, darling, if I
marry you I’ll be an American and any time we’re married under American
law the child is legitimate.”

“Where did you find that out?”

“In the New York _World Almanac_ in the library.”

“You’re a grand girl.”

“I’ll be very glad to be an American and we’ll go to America won’t we,
darling? I want to see Niagara Falls.”

“You’re a fine girl.”

“There’s something else I want to see but I can’t remember it.”

“The stockyards?”

“No. I can’t remember it.”

“The Woolworth building?”

“No.”

“The Grand Canyon?”

“No. But I’d like to see that.”

“What was it?”

“The Golden Gate! That’s what I want to see. Where is the Golden Gate?”

“San Francisco.”

“Then let’s go there. I want to see San Francisco anyway.”

“All right. We’ll go there.”

“Now let’s go up the mountain. Should we? Can we get the M. O. B.?”

“There’s a train a little after five.”

“Let’s get that.”

“All right. I’ll drink one more beer first.”

When we went out to go up the street and climb the stairs to the station
it was very cold. A cold wind was coming down the Rhone valley. There
were lights in the shop windows and we climbed the steep stone stairway
to the upper street, then up another stairs to the station. The electric
train was there waiting, all the lights on. There was a dial that showed
when it left. The clock hands pointed to ten minutes after five. I
looked at the station clock. It was five minutes after. As we got on
board I saw the motorman and conductor coming out of the station wine
shop. We sat down and opened the window. The train was electrically
heated and stuffy but fresh cold air came in through the window.

“Are you tired, Cat?” I asked.

“No. I feel splendid.”

“It isn’t a long ride.”

“I like the ride,” she said. “Don’t worry about me, darling. I feel
fine.”



Snow did not come until three days before Christmas. We woke one morning
and it was snowing. We stayed in bed with the fire roaring in the stove
and watched the snow fall. Mrs. Guttingen took away the breakfast trays
and put more wood in the stove. It was a big snow storm. She said it had
started about midnight. I went to the window and looked out but could
not see across the road. It was blowing and snowing wildly. I went back
to bed and we lay and talked.

“I wish I could ski,” Catherine said. “It’s rotten not to be able to
ski.”

“We’ll get a bobsled and come down the road. That’s no worse for you
than riding in a car.”

“Won’t it be rough?”

“We can see.”

“I hope it won’t be too rough.”

“After a while we’ll take a walk in the snow.”

“Before lunch,” Catherine said, “so we’ll have a good appetite.”

“I’m always hungry.”

“So am I.”

We went out in the snow but it was drifted so that we could not walk
far. I went ahead and made a trail down to the station but when we
reached there we had gone far enough. The snow was blowing so we could
hardly see and we went into the little inn by the station and swept each
other off with a broom and sat on a bench and had vermouths.

“It is a big storm,” the barmaid said.

“Yes.”

“The snow is very late this year.”

“Yes.”

“Could I eat a chocolate bar?” Catherine asked. “Or is it too close to
lunch? I’m always hungry.”

“Go on and eat one,” I said.

“I’ll take one with filberts,” Catherine said.

“They are very good,” the girl said, “I like them the best.”

“I’ll have another vermouth,” I said.

When we came out to start back up the road our track was filled in by
the snow. There were only faint indentations where the holes had been.
The snow blew in our faces so we could hardly see. We brushed off and
went in to have lunch. Mr. Guttingen served the lunch.

“To-morrow there will be skiing,” he said. “Do you ski, Mr. Henry?”

“No. But I want to learn.”

“You will learn very easily. My boy will be here for Christmas and he
will teach you.”

“That’s fine. When does he come?”

“To-morrow night.”

When we were sitting by the stove in the little room after lunch looking
out the window at the snow coming down Catherine said, “Wouldn’t you
like to go on a trip somewhere by yourself, darling, and be with men and
ski?”

“No. Why should I?”

“I should think sometimes you would want to see other people besides
me.”

“Do you want to see other people?”

“No.”

“Neither do I.”

“I know. But you’re different. I’m having a child and that makes me
contented not to do anything. I know I’m awfully stupid now and I talk
too much and I think you ought to get away so you won’t be tired of me.

“Do you want me to go away?”

“No. I want you to stay.”

“That’s what I’m going to do.”

“Come over here,” she said. “I want to feel the bump on your head. It’s
a big bump.” She ran her finger over it. “Darling, would you like to
grow a beard?”

“Would you like me to?”

“It might be fun. I’d like to see you with a beard.”

“All right. I’ll grow one. I’ll start now this minute. It’s a good idea.
It will give me something to do.”

“Are you worried because you haven’t anything to do?”

“No. I like it. I have a fine life. Don’t you?”

“I have a lovely life. But I was afraid because I’m big now that maybe I
was a bore to you.”

“Oh, Cat. You don’t know how crazy I am about you.”

“This way?”

“Just the way you are. I have a fine time. Don’t we have a good life?”

“I do, but I thought maybe you were restless.”

“No. Sometimes I wonder about the front and about people I know but I
don’t worry. I don’t think about anything much.”

“Who do you wonder about?”

“About Rinaldi and the priest and lots of people I know. But I don’t
think about them much. I don’t want to think about the war. I’m through
with it.”

“What are you thinking about now?”

“Nothing.”

“Yes you were. Tell me.”

“I was wondering whether Rinaldi had the syphilis.”

“Was that all?”

“Yes.”

“Has he the syphilis?”

“I don’t know.”

“I’m glad you haven’t. Did you ever have anything like that?”

“I had gonorrhea.”

“I don’t want to hear about it. Was it very painful, darling?”

“Very.”

“I wish I’d had it.”

“No you don’t.”

“I do. I wish I’d had it to be like you. I wish I’d stayed with all your
girls so I could make fun of them to you.”

“That’s a pretty picture.”

“It’s not a pretty picture you having gonorrhea.”

“I know it. Look at it snow now.”

“I’d rather look at you. Darling, why don’t you let your hair grow?”

“How grow?”

“Just grow a little longer.”

“It’s long enough now.”

“No, let it grow a little longer and I could cut mine and we’d be just
alike only one of us blonde and one of us dark.”

“I wouldn’t let you cut yours.”

“It would be fun. I’m tired of it. It’s an awful nuisance in the bed at
night.”

“I like it.”

“Wouldn’t you like it short?”

“I might. I like it the way it is.”

“It might be nice short. Then we’d both be alike. Oh, darling, I want
you so much I want to be you too.”

“You are. We’re the same one.”

“I know it. At night we are.”

“The nights are grand.”

“I want us to be all mixed up. I don’t want you to go away. I just said
that. You go if you want to. But hurry right back. Why, darling, I don’t
live at all when I’m not with you.”

“I won’t ever go away,” I said. “I’m no good when you’re not there. I
haven’t any life at all any more.”

“I want you to have a life. I want you to have a fine life. But we’ll
have it together, won’t we?”

“And now do you want me to stop growing my beard or let it go on?”

“Go on. Grow it. It will be exciting. Maybe it will be done for New
Year’s.”

“Now do you want to play chess?”

“I’d rather play with you.”

“No. Let’s play chess.”

“And afterward we’ll play?”

“Yes.”

“All right.”

I got out the chess-board and arranged the pieces. It was still snowing
hard outside.



One time in the night I woke up and knew that Catherine was awake too.
The moon was shining in the window and made shadows on the bed from the
bars on the window-panes.

“Are you awake, sweetheart?”

“Yes. Can’t you sleep?”

“I just woke up thinking about how I was nearly crazy when I first met
you. Do you remember?”

“You were just a little crazy.”

“I’m never that way any more. I’m grand now. You say grand so sweetly.
Say grand.”

“Grand.”

“Oh, you’re sweet. And I’m not crazy now. I’m just very, very, very
happy.”

“Go on to sleep,” I said.

“All right. Let’s go to sleep at exactly the same moment.”

“All right.”

But we did not. I was awake for quite a long time thinking about things
and watching Catherine sleeping, the moonlight on her face. Then I went
to sleep, too.




                             CHAPTER XXXIX

By the middle of January I had a beard and the winter had settled into
bright cold days and hard cold nights. We could walk on the roads again.
The snow was packed hard and smooth by the hay-sleds and wood-sledges
and the logs that were hauled down the mountain. The snow lay over all
the country, down almost to Montreux. The mountains on the other side of
the lake were all white and the plain of the Rhone valley was covered.
We took long walks on the other side of the mountain to the Bains de
l’Alliaz. Catherine wore hobnailed boots and a cape and carried a stick
with a sharp steel point. She did not look big with the cape and we
would not walk too fast but stopped and sat on logs by the roadside to
rest when she was tired.

There was an inn in the trees at the Bains de l’Alliaz where the
woodcutters stopped to drink, and we sat inside warmed by the stove and
drank hot red wine with spices and lemon in it. They called it
_glühwein_ and it was a good thing to warm you and to celebrate with.
The inn was dark and smoky inside and afterward when you went out the
cold air came sharply into your lungs and numbed the edge of your nose
as you inhaled. We looked back at the inn with light coming from the
windows and the woodcutters’ horses stamping and jerking their heads
outside to keep warm. There was frost on the hairs of their muzzles and
their breathing made plumes of frost in the air. Going up the road
toward home the road was smooth and slippery for a while and the ice
orange from the horses until the wood-hauling track turned off. Then the
road was clean-packed snow and led through the woods, and twice coming
home in the evening, we saw foxes.

It was a fine country and every time that we went out it was fun.

“You have a splendid beard now,” Catherine said. “It looks just like the
woodcutters’. Did you see the man with the tiny gold ear-rings?”

“He’s a chamois hunter,” I said. “They wear them because they say it
makes them hear better.”

“Really? I don’t believe it. I think they wear them to show they are
chamois hunters. Are there chamois near here?”

“Yes, beyond the Dent de Jaman.”

“It was fun seeing the fox.”

“When he sleeps he wraps that tail around him to keep warm.”

“It must be a lovely feeling.”

“I always wanted to have a tail like that. Wouldn’t it be fun if we had
brushes like a fox?”

“It might be very difficult dressing.”

“We’d have clothes made, or live in a country where it wouldn’t make any
difference.”

“We live in a country where nothing makes any difference. Isn’t it grand
how we never see any one? You don’t want to see people do you, darling?”

“No.”

“Should we sit here just a minute? I’m a little bit tired.”

We sat close together on the logs. Ahead the road went down through the
forest.

“She won’t come between us, will she? The little brat.”

“No. We won’t let her.”

“How are we for money?”

“We have plenty. They honored the last sight draft.”

“Won’t your family try and get hold of you now they know you’re in
Switzerland?”

“Probably. I’ll write them something.”

“Haven’t you written them?”

“No. Only the sight draft.”

“Thank God I’m not your family.”

“I’ll send them a cable.”

“Don’t you care anything about them?”

“I did, but we quarrelled so much it wore itself out.”

“I think I’d like them. I’d probably like them very much.”

“Let’s not talk about them or I’ll start to worry about them.” After a
while I said, “Let’s go on if you’re rested.”

“I’m rested.”

We went on down the road. It was dark now and the snow squeaked under
our boots. The night was dry and cold and very clear.

“I love your beard,” Catherine said. “It’s a great success. It looks so
stiff and fierce and it’s very soft and a great pleasure.”

“Do you like it better than without?”

“I think so. You know, darling, I’m not going to cut my hair now until
after young Catherine’s born. I look too big and matronly now. But after
she’s born and I’m thin again I’m going to cut it and then I’ll be a
fine new and different girl for you. We’ll go together and get it cut,
or I’ll go alone and come and surprise you.”

I did not say anything.

“You won’t say I can’t, will you?”

“No. I think it would be exciting.”

“Oh, you’re so sweet. And maybe I’d look lovely, darling, and be so thin
and exciting to you and you’ll fall in love with me all over again.”

“Hell,” I said, “I love you enough now. What do you want to do? Ruin
me?”

“Yes. I want to ruin you.”

“Good,” I said, “that’s what I want too.”




                               CHAPTER XL

We had a fine life. We lived through the months of January and February
and the winter was very fine and we were very happy. There had been
short thaws when the wind blew warm and the snow softened and the air
felt like Spring, but always the clear hard cold had come again and the
winter had returned. In March came the first break in the winter. In the
night it started raining. It rained on all morning and turned the snow
to slush and made the mountain-side dismal. There were clouds over the
lake and over the valley. It was raining high up the mountain. Catherine
wore heavy overshoes and I wore Mr. Guttingen’s rubber-boots and we
walked to the station under an umbrella, through the slush and the
running water that was washing the ice of the roads bare, to stop at the
pub before lunch for a vermouth. Outside we could hear the rain.

“Do you think we ought to move into town?”

“What do you think?” Catherine asked.

“If the winter is over and the rain keeps up it won’t be fun up here.
How long is it before young Catherine?”

“About a month. Perhaps a little more.”

“We might go down and stay in Montreux.”

“Why don’t we go to Lausanne? That’s where the hospital is.”

“All right. But I thought maybe that was too big a town.”

“We can be as much alone in a bigger town and Lausanne might be nice.”

“When should we go?”

“I don’t care. Whenever you want, darling. I don’t want to leave here if
you don’t want.”

“Let’s see how the weather turns out.”

It rained for three days. The snow was all gone now on the mountain-side
below the station. The road was a torrent of muddy snow-water. It was
too wet and slushy to go out. On the morning of the third day of rain we
decided to go down into town.

“That is all right, Mr. Henry,” Guttingen said. “You do not have to give
me any notice. I did not think you would want to stay now the bad
weather is come.”

“We have to be near the hospital anyway on account of Madame,” I said.

“I understand,” he said. “Will you come back some time and stay, with
the little one?”

“Yes, if you would have room.”

“In the Spring when it is nice you could come and enjoy it. We could put
the little one and the nurse in the big room that is closed now and you
and Madame could have your same room looking out over the lake.”

“I’ll write about coming,” I said. We packed and left on the train that
went down after lunch. Mr. and Mrs. Guttingen came down to the station
with us and he hauled our baggage down on a sled through the slush. They
stood beside the station in the rain waving good-by.

“They were very sweet,” Catherine said.

“They were fine to us.”

We took the train to Lausanne from Montreux. Looking out the window
toward where we had lived you could not see the mountains for the
clouds. The train stopped in Vevey, then went on, passing the lake on
one side and on the other the wet brown fields and the bare woods and
the wet houses. We came into Lausanne and went into a medium-sized hotel
to stay. It was still raining as we drove through the streets and into
the carriage entrance of the hotel. The concierge with brass keys on his
lapels, the elevator, the carpets on the floors, and the white washbowls
with shining fixtures, the brass bed and the big comfortable bedroom all
seemed very great luxury after the Guttingens. The windows of the room
looked out on a wet garden with a wall topped by an iron fence. Across
the street, which sloped steeply, was another hotel with a similar wall
and garden. I looked out at the rain falling in the fountain of the
garden.

Catherine turned on all the lights and commenced unpacking. I ordered a
whiskey and soda and lay on the bed and read the papers I had bought at
the station. It was March, 1918, and the German offensive had started in
France. I drank the whiskey and soda and read while Catherine unpacked
and moved around the room.

“You know what I have to get, darling,” she said.

“What?”

“Baby clothes. There aren’t many people reach my time without baby
things.”

“You can buy them.”

“I know. That’s what I’ll do to-morrow. I’ll find out what is
necessary.”

“You ought to know. You were a nurse.”

“But so few of the soldiers had babies in the hospitals.”

“I did.”

She hit me with the pillow and spilled the whiskey and soda.

“I’ll order you another,” she said. “I’m sorry I spilled it.”

“There wasn’t much left. Come on over to the bed.”

“No. I have to try and make this room look like something.”

“Like what?”

“Like our home.”

“Hang out the Allied flags.”

“Oh shut up.”

“Say it again.”

“Shut up.”

“You say it so cautiously,” I said. “As though you didn’t want to offend
any one.”

“I don’t.”

“Then come over to the bed.”

“All right.” She came and sat on the bed. “I know I’m no fun for you,
darling. I’m like a big flour-barrel.”

“No you’re not. You’re beautiful and you’re sweet.”

“I’m just something very ungainly that you’ve married.”

“No you’re not. You’re more beautiful all the time.”

“But I will be thin again, darling.”

“You’re thin now.”

“You’ve been drinking.”

“Just whiskey and soda.”

“There’s another one coming,” she said. “And then should we order dinner
up here?”

“That will be good.”

“Then we won’t go out, will we? We’ll just stay in to-night.”

“And play,” I said.

“I’ll drink some wine,” Catherine said. “It won’t hurt me. Maybe we can
get some of our old white capri.”

“I know we can,” I said. “They’ll have Italian wines at a hotel this
size.”

The waiter knocked at the door. He brought the whiskey in a glass with
ice and beside the glass on a tray a small bottle of soda.

“Thank you,” I said. “Put it down there. Will you please have dinner for
two brought up here and two bottles of dry white capri in ice.”

“Do you wish to commence your dinner with soup?”

“Do you want soup, Cat?”

“Please.”

“Bring soup for one.”

“Thank you, sir.” He went out and shut the door. I went back to the
papers and the war in the papers and poured the soda slowly over the ice
into the whiskey. I would have to tell them not to put ice in the
whiskey. Let them bring the ice separately. That way you could tell how
much whiskey there was and it would not suddenly be too thin from the
soda. I would get a bottle of whiskey and have them bring ice and soda.
That was the sensible way. Good whiskey was very pleasant. It was one of
the pleasant parts of life.

“What are you thinking, darling?”

“About whiskey.”

“What about whiskey?”

“About how nice it is.”

Catherine made a face. “All right,” she said.



We stayed at that hotel three weeks. It was not bad; the dining-room was
usually empty and very often we ate in our room at night. We walked in
the town and took the cogwheel railway down to Ouchy and walked beside
the lake. The weather became quite warm and it was like Spring. We
wished we were back in the mountains but the Spring weather lasted only
a few days and then the cold rawness of the breaking-up of winter came
again.

Catherine bought the things she needed for the baby, up in the town. I
went to a gymnasium in the arcade to box for exercise. I usually went up
there in the morning while Catherine stayed late in bed. On the days of
false Spring it was very nice, after boxing and taking a shower, to walk
along the streets smelling the Spring in the air and stop at a café to
sit and watch the people and read the paper and drink a vermouth; then
go down to the hotel and have lunch with Catherine. The professor at the
boxing gymnasium wore mustaches and was very precise and jerky and went
all to pieces if you started after him. But it was pleasant in the gym.
There was good air and light and I worked quite hard, skipping rope,
shadow-boxing, doing abdominal exercises lying on the floor in a patch
of sunlight that came through the open window, and occasionally scaring
the professor when we boxed. I could not shadow-box in front of the
narrow long mirror at first because it looked so strange to see a man
with a beard boxing. But finally I just thought it was funny. I wanted
to take off the beard as soon as I started boxing but Catherine did not
want me to.

Sometimes Catherine and I went for rides out in the country in a
carriage. It was nice to ride when the days were pleasant and we found
two good places where we could ride out to eat. Catherine could not walk
very far now and I loved to ride out along the country roads with her.
When there was a good day we had a splendid time and we never had a bad
time. We knew the baby was very close now and it gave us both a feeling
as though something were hurrying us and we could not lose any time
together.




                              CHAPTER XLI

One morning I awoke about three o’clock hearing Catherine stirring in
the bed.

“Are you all right, Cat?”

“I’ve been having some pains, darling.”

“Regularly?”

“No, not very.”

“If you have them at all regularly we’ll go to the hospital.”

I was very sleepy and went back to sleep. A little while later I woke
again.

“Maybe you’d better call up the doctor,” Catherine said. “I think maybe
this is it.”

I went to the phone and called the doctor. “How often are the pains
coming?” he asked.

“How often are they coming, Cat?”

“I should think every quarter of an hour.”

“You should go to the hospital then,” the doctor said. “I will dress and
go there right away myself.”

I hung up and called the garage near the station to send up a taxi. No
one answered the phone for a long time. Then I finally got a man who
promised to send up a taxi at once. Catherine was dressing. Her bag was
all packed with the things she would need at the hospital and the baby
things. Outside in the hall I rang for the elevator. There was no
answer. I went downstairs. There was no one downstairs except the
night-watchman. I brought the elevator up myself, put Catherine’s bag in
it, she stepped in and we went down. The night-watchman opened the door
for us and we sat outside on the stone slabs beside the stairs down to
the driveway and waited for the taxi. The night was clear and the stars
were out. Catherine was very excited.

“I’m so glad it’s started,” she said. “Now in a little while it will be
all over.”

“You’re a good brave girl.”

“I’m not afraid. I wish the taxi would come, though.”

We heard it coming up the street and saw its headlights. It turned into
the driveway and I helped Catherine in and the driver put the bag up in
front.

“Drive to the hospital,” I said.

We went out of the driveway and started up the hill.

At the hospital we went in and I carried the bag. There was a woman at
the desk who wrote down Catherine’s name, age, address, relatives and
religion, in a book. She said she had no religion and the woman drew a
line in the space after that word. She gave her name as Catherine Henry.

“I will take you up to your room,” she said. We went up in an elevator.
The woman stopped it and we stepped out and followed her down a hall.
Catherine held tight to my arm.

“This is the room,” the woman said. “Will you please undress and get
into bed? Here is a nightgown for you to wear.”

“I have a nightgown,” Catherine said.

“It is better for you to wear this nightgown,” the woman said.

I went outside and sat on a chair in the hallway.

“You can come in now,” the woman said from the doorway. Catherine was
lying in the narrow bed wearing a plain, square-cut nightgown that
looked as though it were made of rough sheeting. She smiled at me.

“I’m having fine pains now,” she said. The woman was holding her wrist
and timing the pains with a watch.

“That was a big one,” Catherine said. I saw it on her face.

“Where’s the doctor?” I asked the woman.

“He’s lying down sleeping. He will be here when he is needed.”

“I must do something for Madame, now,” the nurse said. “Would you please
step out again?”

I went out into the hall. It was a bare hall with two windows and closed
doors all down the corridor. It smelled of hospital. I sat on the chair
and looked at the floor and prayed for Catherine.

“You can come in,” the nurse said. I went in.

“Hello, darling,” Catherine said.

“How is it?”

“They are coming quite often now.” Her face drew up. Then she smiled.

“That was a real one. Do you want to put your hand on my back again,
nurse?”

“If it helps you,” the nurse said.

“You go away, darling,” Catherine said. “Go out and get something to
eat. I may do this for a long time the nurse says.”

“The first labor is usually protracted,” the nurse said.

“Please go out and get something to eat,” Catherine said. “I’m fine,
really.”

“I’ll stay awhile,” I said.

The pains came quite regularly, then slackened off. Catherine was very
excited. When the pains were bad she called them good ones. When they
started to fall off she was disappointed and ashamed.

“You go out, darling,” she said. “I think you are just making me
self-conscious.” Her face tied up. “There. That was better. I so want to
be a good wife and have this child without any foolishness. Please go
and get some breakfast, darling, and then come back. I won’t miss you.
Nurse is splendid to me.”

“You have plenty of time for breakfast,” the nurse said.

“I’ll go then. Good-by, sweet.”

“Good-by,” Catherine said, “and have a fine breakfast for me too.”

“Where can I get breakfast?” I asked the nurse.

“There’s a café down the street at the square,” she said. “It should be
open now.”

Outside it was getting light. I walked down the empty street to the
café. There was a light in the window. I went in and stood at the zinc
bar and an old man served me a glass of white wine and a brioche. The
brioche was yesterday’s. I dipped it in the wine and then drank a glass
of coffee.

“What do you do at this hour?” the old man asked.

“My wife is in labor at the hospital.”

“So. I wish you good luck.”

“Give me another glass of wine.”

He poured it from the bottle slopping it over a little so some ran down
on the zinc. I drank this glass, paid and went out. Outside along the
street were the refuse cans from the houses waiting for the collector. A
dog was nosing at one of the cans.

“What do you want?” I asked and looked in the can to see if there was
anything I could pull out for him; there was nothing on top but
coffee-grounds, dust and some dead flowers.

“There isn’t anything, dog,” I said. The dog crossed the street. I went
up the stairs in the hospital to the floor Catherine was on and down the
hall to her room. I knocked on the door. There was no answer. I opened
the door; the room was empty, except for Catherine’s bag on a chair and
her dressing-gown hanging on a hook on the wall. I went out and down the
hall, looking for somebody. I found a nurse.

“Where is Madame Henry?”

“A lady has just gone to the delivery room.”

“Where is it?”

“I will show you.”

She took me down to the end of the hall. The door of the room was partly
open. I could see Catherine lying on a table, covered by a sheet. The
nurse was on one side and the doctor stood on the other side of the
table beside some cylinders. The doctor held a rubber mask attached to a
tube in one hand.

“I will give you a gown and you can go in,” the nurse said. “Come in
here, please.”

She put a white gown on me and pinned it at the neck in back with a
safety pin.

“Now you can go in,” she said. I went into the room.

“Hello, darling,” Catherine said in a strained voice. “I’m not doing
much.”

“You are Mr. Henry?” the doctor asked.

“Yes. How is everything going, doctor?”

“Things are going very well,” the doctor said. “We came in here where it
is easy to give gas for the pains.”

“I want it now,” Catherine said. The doctor placed the rubber mask over
her face and turned a dial and I watched Catherine breathing deeply and
rapidly. Then she pushed the mask away. The doctor shut off the petcock.

“That wasn’t a very big one. I had a very big one a while ago. The
doctor made me go clear out, didn’t you, doctor?” Her voice was strange.
It rose on the word doctor.

The doctor smiled.

“I want it again,” Catherine said. She held the rubber tight to her face
and breathed fast. I heard her moaning a little. Then she pulled the
mask away and smiled.

“That was a big one,” she said. “That was a very big one. Don’t you
worry, darling. You go away. Go have another breakfast.”

“I’ll stay,” I said.



We had gone to the hospital about three o’clock in the morning. At noon
Catherine was still in the delivery room. The pains had slackened again.
She looked very tired and worn now but she was still cheerful.

“I’m not any good, darling,” she said. “I’m so sorry. I thought I would
do it very easily. Now—there’s one—” she reached out her hand for the
mask and held it over her face. The doctor moved the dial and watched
her. In a little while it was over.

“It wasn’t much,” Catherine said. She smiled. “I’m a fool about the gas.
It’s wonderful.”

“We’ll get some for the home,” I said.

“_There one comes_,” Catherine said quickly. The doctor turned the dial
and looked at his watch.

“What is the interval now?” I asked.

“About a minute.”

“Don’t you want lunch?”

“I will have something pretty soon,” he said.

“You must have something to eat, doctor,” Catherine said. “I’m so sorry
I go on so long. Couldn’t my husband give me the gas?”

“If you wish,” the doctor said. “You turn it to the numeral two.”

“I see,” I said. There was a marker on a dial that turned with a handle.

“_I want it now_,” Catherine said. She held the mask tight to her face.
I turned the dial to number two and when Catherine put down the mask I
turned it off. It was very good of the doctor to let me do something.

“Did you do it, darling?” Catherine asked. She stroked my wrist.

“Sure.”

“You’re so lovely.” She was a little drunk from the gas.

“I will eat from a tray in the next room,” the doctor said. “You can
call me any moment.” While the time passed I watched him eat, then,
after a while, I saw that he was lying down and smoking a cigarette.
Catherine was getting very tired.

“Do you think I’ll ever have this baby?” she asked.

“Yes, of course you will.”

“I try as hard as I can. I push down but it goes away. _There it comes.
Give it to me._”

At two o’clock I went out and had lunch. There were a few men in the
café sitting with coffee and glasses of kirsch or marc on the tables. I
sat down at a table. “Can I eat?” I asked the waiter.

“It is past time for lunch.”

“Isn’t there anything for all hours?”

“You can have _choucroute_.”

“Give me _choucroute_ and beer.”

“A demi or a bock?”

“A light demi.”

The waiter brought a dish of sauerkraut with a slice of ham over the top
and a sausage buried in the hot wine-soaked cabbage. I ate it and drank
the beer. I was very hungry. I watched the people at the tables in the
café. At one table they were playing cards. Two men at the table next me
were talking and smoking. The café was full of smoke. The zinc bar,
where I had breakfasted, had three people behind it now; the old man, a
plump woman in a black dress who sat behind a counter and kept track of
everything served to the tables, and a boy in an apron. I wondered how
many children the woman had and what it had been like.

When I was through with the _choucroute_ I went back to the hospital.
The street was all clean now. There were no refuse cans out. The day was
cloudy but the sun was trying to come through. I rode upstairs in the
elevator, stepped out and went down the hall to Catherine’s room, where
I had left my white gown. I put it on and pinned it in back at the neck.
I looked in the glass and saw myself looking like a fake doctor with a
beard. I went down the hall to the delivery room. The door was closed
and I knocked. No one answered so I turned the handle and went in. The
doctor sat by Catherine. The nurse was doing something at the other end
of the room.

“Here is your husband,” the doctor said.

“Oh, darling, I have the most wonderful doctor,” Catherine said in a
very strange voice. “He’s been telling me the most wonderful story and
when the pain came too badly he put me all the way out. He’s wonderful.
You’re wonderful, doctor.”

“You’re drunk,” I said.

“I know it,” Catherine said. “But you shouldn’t say it.” Then “_Give it
to me. Give it to me._” She clutched hold of the mask and breathed short
and deep, pantingly, making the respirator click. Then she gave a long
sigh and the doctor reached with his left hand and lifted away the mask.

“That was a very big one,” Catherine said. Her voice was very strange.
“I’m not going to die now, darling. I’m past where I was going to die.
Aren’t you glad?”

“Don’t you get in that place again.”

“I won’t. I’m not afraid of it though. I won’t die, darling.”

“You will not do any such foolishness,” the doctor said. “You would not
die and leave your husband.”

“Oh, no. I won’t die. I wouldn’t die. It’s silly to die. There it comes.
_Give it to me._”

After a while the doctor said, “You will go out, Mr. Henry, for a few
moments and I will make an examination.”

“He wants to see how I am doing,” Catherine said. “You can come back
afterward, darling, can’t he, doctor?”

“Yes,” said the doctor. “I will send word when he can come back.”

I went out the door and down the hall to the room where Catherine was to
be after the baby came. I sat in a chair there and looked at the room. I
had the paper in my coat that I had bought when I went out for lunch and
I read it. It was beginning to be dark outside and I turned the light on
to read. After a while I stopped reading and turned off the light and
watched it get dark outside. I wondered why the doctor did not send for
me. Maybe it was better I was away. He probably wanted me away for a
while. I looked at my watch. If he did not send for me in ten minutes I
would go down anyway.

Poor, poor dear Cat. And this was the price you paid for sleeping
together. This was the end of the trap. This was what people got for
loving each other. Thank God for gas, anyway. What must it have been
like before there were anæsthetics? Once it started, they were in the
mill-race. Catherine had a good time in the time of pregnancy. It wasn’t
bad. She was hardly ever sick. She was not awfully uncomfortable until
toward the last. So now they got her in the end. You never got away with
anything. Get away hell! It would have been the same if we had been
married fifty times. And what if she should die? She won’t die. People
don’t die in childbirth nowadays. That was what all husbands thought.
Yes, but what if she should die? She won’t die. She’s just having a bad
time. The initial labor is usually protracted. She’s only having a bad
time. Afterward we’d say what a bad time and Catherine would say it
wasn’t really so bad. But what if she should die? She can’t die. Yes,
but what if she should die? She can’t, I tell you. Don’t be a fool. It’s
just a bad time. It’s just nature giving her hell. It’s only the first
labor, which is almost always protracted. Yes, but what if she should
die? She can’t die. Why would she die? What reason is there for her to
die? There’s just a child that has to be born, the by-product of good
nights in Milan. It makes trouble and is born and then you look after it
and get fond of it maybe. But what if she should die? She won’t die. But
what if she should die? She won’t. She’s all right. But what if she
should die? She can’t die. But what if she should die? Hey, what about
that? What if she should die?

The doctor came into the room.

“How does it go, doctor?”

“It doesn’t go,” he said.

“What do you mean?”

“Just that. I made an examination—” He detailed the result of the
examination. “Since then I’ve waited to see. But it doesn’t go.”

“What do you advise?”

“There are two things. Either a high forceps delivery which can tear and
be quite dangerous besides being possibly bad for the child, and a
Cæsarean.”

“What is the danger of a Cæsarean?” What if she should die!

“It should be no greater than the danger of an ordinary delivery.”

“Would you do it yourself?”

“Yes. I would need possibly an hour to get things ready and to get the
people I would need. Perhaps a little less.”

“What do you think?”

“I would advise a Cæsarean operation. If it were my wife I would do a
Cæsarean.”

“What are the after effects?”

“There are none. There is only the scar.”

“What about infection?”

“The danger is not so great as in a high forceps delivery.”

“What if you just went on and did nothing?”

“You would have to do something eventually. Mrs. Henry is already losing
much of her strength. The sooner we operate now the safer.”

“Operate as soon as you can,” I said.

“I will go and give the instructions.”

I went into the delivery room. The nurse was with Catherine who lay on
the table, big under the sheet, looking very pale and tired.

“Did you tell him he could do it?” she asked.

“Yes.”

“Isn’t that grand. Now it will be all over in an hour. I’m almost done,
darling. I’m going all to pieces. _Please give me that._ It doesn’t
work. _Oh, it doesn’t work!_”

“Breathe deeply.”

“I am. Oh, it doesn’t work any more. It doesn’t work!”

“Get another cylinder,” I said to the nurse.

“That is a new cylinder.”

“I’m just a fool, darling,” Catherine said. “But it doesn’t work any
more.” She began to cry. “Oh, I wanted so to have this baby and not make
trouble, and now I’m all done and all gone to pieces and it doesn’t
work. Oh, darling, it doesn’t work at all. I don’t care if I die if it
will only stop. Oh, please, darling, please make it stop. _There it
comes. Oh Oh Oh!_” She breathed sobbingly in the mask. “It doesn’t work.
It doesn’t work. It doesn’t work. Don’t mind me, darling. Please don’t
cry. Don’t mind me. I’m just gone all to pieces. You poor sweet. I love
you so and I’ll be good again. I’ll be good this time. _Can’t they give
me something?_ If they could only give me something.”

“I’ll make it work. I’ll turn it all the way.”

“Give it to me now.”

I turned the dial all the way and as she breathed hard and deep her hand
relaxed on the mask. I shut off the gas and lifted the mask. She came
back from a long way away.

“That was lovely, darling. Oh, you’re so good to me.

“You be brave, because I can’t do that all the time. It might kill you.”

“I’m not brave any more, darling. I’m all broken. They’ve broken me. I
know it now.”

“Everybody is that way.”

“But it’s awful. They just keep it up till they break you.”

“In an hour it will be over.”

“Isn’t that lovely? Darling, I won’t die, will I?”

“No. I promise you won’t.”

“Because I don’t want to die and leave you, but I get so tired of it and
I feel I’m going to die.”

“Nonsense. Everybody feels that.”

“Sometimes I know I’m going to die.”

“You won’t. You can’t.”

“But what if I should?”

“I won’t let you.”

“Give it to me quick. _Give it to me!_”

Then afterward, “I won’t die. I won’t let myself die.”

“Of course you won’t.”

“You’ll stay with me?”

“Not to watch it.”

“No, just to be there.”

“Sure. I’ll be there all the time.”

“You’re so good to me. There, give it to me. Give me some more. _It’s
not working!_”

I turned the dial to three and then four. I wished the doctor would come
back. I was afraid of the numbers above two.



Finally a new doctor came in with two nurses and they lifted Catherine
onto a wheeled stretcher and we started down the hall. The stretcher
went rapidly down the hall and into the elevator where every one had to
crowd against the wall to make room; then up, then an open door and out
of the elevator and down the hall on rubber wheels to the operating
room. I did not recognize the doctor with his cap and mask on. There was
another doctor and more nurses.

“_They’ve got to give me something_,” Catherine said. “_They’ve got to
give me something._ Oh please, doctor, give me enough to do some good!”

One of the doctors put a mask over her face and I looked through the
door and saw the bright small amphitheatre of the operating room.

“You can go in the other door and sit up there,” a nurse said to me.
There were benches behind a rail that looked down on the white table and
the lights. I looked at Catherine. The mask was over her face and she
was quiet now. They wheeled the stretcher forward. I turned away and
walked down the hall. Two nurses were hurrying toward the entrance to
the gallery.

“It’s a Cæsarean,” one said. “They’re going to do a Cæsarean.”

The other one laughed, “We’re just in time. Aren’t we lucky?” They went
in the door that led to the gallery.

Another nurse came along. She was hurrying too.

“You go right in there. Go right in,” she said.

“I’m staying outside.”

She hurried in. I walked up and down the hall. I was afraid to go in. I
looked out the window. It was dark but in the light from the window I
could see it was raining. I went into a room at the far end of the hall
and looked at the labels on bottles in a glass case. Then I came out and
stood in the empty hall and watched the door of the operating room.

A doctor came out followed by a nurse. He held something in his two
hands that looked like a freshly skinned rabbit and hurried across the
corridor with it and in through another door. I went down to the door he
had gone into and found them in the room doing things to a new-born
child. The doctor held him up for me to see. He held him by the heels
and slapped him.

“Is he all right?”

“He’s magnificent. He’ll weigh five kilos.”

I had no feeling for him. He did not seem to have anything to do with
me. I felt no feeling of fatherhood.

“Aren’t you proud of your son?” the nurse asked. They were washing him
and wrapping him in something. I saw the little dark face and dark hand,
but I did not see him move or hear him cry. The doctor was doing
something to him again. He looked upset.

“No,” I said. “He nearly killed his mother.”

“It isn’t the little darling’s fault. Didn’t you want a boy?”

“No,” I said. The doctor was busy with him. He held him up by the feet
and slapped him. I did not wait to see it. I went out in the hall. I
could go in now and see. I went in the door and a little way down the
gallery. The nurses who were sitting at the rail motioned for me to come
down where they were. I shook my head. I could see enough where I was.

I thought Catherine was dead. She looked dead. Her face was gray, the
part of it that I could see. Down below, under the light, the doctor was
sewing up the great long, forcep-spread, thick-edged, wound. Another
doctor in a mask gave the anæsthetic. Two nurses in masks handed things.
It looked like a drawing of the Inquisition. I knew as I watched I could
have watched it all, but I was glad I hadn’t. I do not think I could
have watched them cut, but I watched the wound closed into a high welted
ridge with quick skilful-looking stitches like a cobbler’s, and was
glad. When the wound was closed I went out into the hall and walked up
and down again. After a while the doctor came out.

“How is she?”

“She is all right. Did you watch?”

He looked tired.

“I saw you sew up. The incision looked very long.”

“You thought so?”

“Yes. Will that scar flatten out?”

“Oh, yes.”

After a while they brought out the wheeled stretcher and took it very
rapidly down the hallway to the elevator. I went along beside it.
Catherine was moaning. Downstairs they put her in the bed in her room. I
sat in a chair at the foot of the bed. There was a nurse in the room. I
got up and stood by the bed. It was dark in the room. Catherine put out
her hand, “Hello, darling,” she said. Her voice was very weak and tired.

“Hello, you sweet.”

“What sort of baby was it?”

“Sh—don’t talk,” the nurse said.

“A boy. He’s long and wide and dark.”

“Is he all right?”

“Yes,” I said. “He’s fine.”

I saw the nurse look at me strangely.

“I’m awfully tired,” Catherine said. “And I hurt like hell. Are you all
right, darling?”

“I’m fine. Don’t talk.”

“You were lovely to me. Oh, darling, I hurt dreadfully. What does he
look like?”

“He looks like a skinned rabbit with a puckered-up old-man’s face.”

“You must go out,” the nurse said. “Madame Henry must not talk.”

“I’ll be outside,” I said.

“Go and get something to eat.”

“No. I’ll be outside.” I kissed Catherine. She was very gray and weak
and tired.

“May I speak to you?” I said to the nurse. She came out in the hall with
me. I walked a little way down the hall.

“What’s the matter with the baby?” I asked.

“Didn’t you know?”

“No.”

“He wasn’t alive.”

“He was dead?”

“They couldn’t start him breathing. The cord was caught around his neck
or something.”

“So he’s dead.”

“Yes. It’s such a shame. He was such a fine big boy. I thought you
knew.”

“No,” I said. “You better go back in with Madame.”

I sat down on the chair in front of a table where there were nurses’
reports hung on clips at the side and looked out of the window. I could
see nothing but the dark and the rain falling across the light from the
window. So that was it. The baby was dead. That was why the doctor
looked so tired. But why had they acted the way they did in the room
with him? They supposed he would come around and start breathing
probably. I had no religion but I knew he ought to have been baptized.
But what if he never breathed at all. He hadn’t. He had never been
alive. Except in Catherine. I’d felt him kick there often enough. But I
hadn’t for a week. Maybe he was choked all the time. Poor little kid. I
wished the hell I’d been choked like that. No I didn’t. Still there
would not be all this dying to go through. Now Catherine would die. That
was what you did. You died. You did not know what it was about. You
never had time to learn. They threw you in and told you the rules and
the first time they caught you off base they killed you. Or they killed
you gratuitously like Aymo. Or gave you the syphilis like Rinaldo. But
they killed you in the end. You could count on that. Stay around and
they would kill you.

Once in camp I put a log on top of the fire and it was full of ants. As
it commenced to burn, the ants swarmed out and went first toward the
centre where the fire was; then turned back and ran toward the end. When
there were enough on the end they fell off into the fire. Some got out,
their bodies burnt and flattened, and went off not knowing where they
were going. But most of them went toward the fire and then back toward
the end and swarmed on the cool end and finally fell off into the fire.
I remember thinking at the time that it was the end of the world and a
splendid chance to be a messiah and lift the log off the fire and throw
it out where the ants could get off onto the ground. But I did not do
anything but throw a tin cup of water on the log, so that I would have
the cup empty to put whiskey in before I added water to it. I think the
cup of water on the burning log only steamed the ants.

So now I sat out in the hall and waited to hear how Catherine was. The
nurse did not come out, so after a while I went to the door and opened
it very softly and looked in. I could not see at first because there was
a bright light in the hall and it was dark in the room. Then I saw the
nurse sitting by the bed and Catherine’s head on a pillow, and she all
flat under the sheet. The nurse put her finger to her lips, then stood
up and came to the door.

“How is she?” I asked.

“She’s all right,” the nurse said. “You should go and have your supper
and then come back if you wish.”

I went down the hall and then down the stairs and out the door of the
hospital and down the dark street in the rain to the café. It was
brightly lighted inside and there were many people at the tables. I did
not see a place to sit, and a waiter came up to me and took my wet coat
and hat and showed me a place at a table across from an elderly man who
was drinking beer and reading the evening paper. I sat down and asked
the waiter what the _plat du jour_ was.

“Veal stew—but it is finished.”

“What can I have to eat?”

“Ham and eggs, eggs with cheese, or _choucroute_.”

“I had _choucroute_ this noon,” I said.

“That’s true,” he said. “That’s true. You ate _choucroute_ this noon.”
He was a middle-aged man with a bald top to his head and his hair
slicked over it. He had a kind face.

“What do you want? Ham and eggs or eggs with cheese?”

“Ham and eggs,” I said, “and beer.”

“A demi-blonde?”

“Yes,” I said.

“I remembered,” he said. “You took a demi-blonde this noon.”

I ate the ham and eggs and drank the beer. The ham and eggs were in a
round dish—the ham underneath and the eggs on top. It was very hot and
at the first mouthful I had to take a drink of beer to cool my mouth. I
was hungry and I asked the waiter for another order. I drank several
glasses of beer. I was not thinking at all but read the paper of the man
opposite me. It was about the break through on the British front. When
he realized I was reading the back of his paper he folded it over. I
thought of asking the waiter for a paper, but I could not concentrate.
It was hot in the café and the air was bad. Many of the people at the
tables knew one another. There were several card games going on. The
waiters were busy bringing drinks from the bar to the tables. Two men
came in and could find no place to sit. They stood opposite the table
where I was. I ordered another beer. I was not ready to leave yet. It
was too soon to go back to the hospital. I tried not to think and to be
perfectly calm. The men stood around but no one was leaving, so they
went out. I drank another beer. There was quite a pile of saucers now on
the table in front of me. The man opposite me had taken off his
spectacles, put them away in a case, folded his paper and put it in his
pocket and now sat holding his liqueur glass and looking out at the
room. Suddenly I knew I had to get back. I called the waiter, paid the
reckoning, got into my coat, put on my hat and started out the door. I
walked through the rain up to the hospital.

Upstairs I met the nurse coming down the hall.

“I just called you at the hotel,” she said. Something dropped inside me.

“What is wrong?”

“Mrs. Henry has had a hemorrhage.”

“Can I go in?”

“No, not yet. The doctor is with her.”

“Is it dangerous?”

“It is very dangerous.” The nurse went into the room and shut the door.
I sat outside in the hall. Everything was gone inside of me. I did not
think. I could not think. I knew she was going to die and I prayed that
she would not. Don’t let her die. Oh, God, please don’t let her die.
I’ll do anything for you if you won’t let her die. Please, please,
please, dear God, don’t let her die. Dear God, don’t let her die.
Please, please, please don’t let her die. God please make her not die.
I’ll do anything you say if you don’t let her die. You took the baby but
don’t let her die. That was all right but don’t let her die. Please,
please, dear God, don’t let her die.

The nurse opened the door and motioned with her finger for me to come. I
followed her into the room. Catherine did not look up when I came in. I
went over to the side of the bed. The doctor was standing by the bed on
the opposite side. Catherine looked at me and smiled. I bent down over
the bed and started to cry.

“Poor darling,” Catherine said very softly. She looked gray.

“You’re all right, Cat,” I said. “You’re going to be all right.”

“I’m going to die,” she said; then waited and said, “I hate it.”

I took her hand.

“Don’t touch me,” she said. I let go of her hand. She smiled. “Poor
darling. You touch me all you want.”

“You’ll be all right, Cat. I know you’ll be all right.”

“I meant to write you a letter to have if anything happened, but I
didn’t do it.”

“Do you want me to get a priest or any one to come and see you?”

“Just you,” she said. Then a little later, “I’m not afraid. I just hate
it.”

“You must not talk so much,” the doctor said.

“All right,” Catherine said.

“Do you want me to do anything, Cat? Can I get you anything?”

Catherine smiled, “No.” Then a little later, “You won’t do our things
with another girl, or say the same things, will you?”

“Never.”

“I want you to have girls, though.”

“I don’t want them.”

“You are talking too much,” the doctor said. “Mr. Henry must go out. He
can come back again later. You are not going to die. You must not be
silly.”

“All right,” Catherine said. “I’ll come and stay with you nights,” she
said. It was very hard for her to talk.

“Please go out of the room,” the doctor said. “You cannot talk.”
Catherine winked at me, her face gray. “I’ll be right outside,” I said.

“Don’t worry, darling,” Catherine said. “I’m not a bit afraid. It’s just
a dirty trick.”

“You dear, brave sweet.”

I waited outside in the hall. I waited a long time. The nurse came to
the door and came over to me. “I’m afraid Mrs. Henry is very ill,” she
said. “I’m afraid for her.”

“Is she dead?”

“No, but she is unconscious.”

It seems she had one hemorrhage after another. They couldn’t stop it. I
went into the room and stayed with Catherine until she died. She was
unconscious all the time, and it did not take her very long to die.



Outside the room, in the hall, I spoke to the doctor, “is there anything
I can do to-night?”

“No. There is nothing to do. Can I take you to your hotel?”

“No, thank you. I am going to stay here a while.”

“I know there is nothing to say. I cannot tell you——”

“No,” I said. “There’s nothing to say.”

“Good-night,” he said. “I cannot take you to your hotel?”

“No, thank you.”

“It was the only thing to do,” he said. “The operation proved——”

“I do not want to talk about it,” I said.

“I would like to take you to your hotel.”

“No, thank you.”

He went down the hall. I went to the door of the room.

“You can’t come in now,” one of the nurses said.

“Yes I can,” I said.

“You can’t come in yet.”

“You get out,” I said. “The other one too.”

But after I had got them out and shut the door and turned off the light
it wasn’t any good. It was like saying good-by to a statue. After a
while I went out and left the hospital and walked back to the hotel in
the rain.